




[This text is intended for users whose text readers cannot use the
"real" (Unicode/UTF-8) version of the file. Some characters have been
shown in alternative forms:

  âêîôû ÂÊÊÔÛ  [macron or "long" mark rendered as circumflex]
  {e} {i} {o}  [breve or "short" mark shown in {braces}]

The breve is very rare. Braces and circumflex accents do not occur
elsewhere in the text.

As explained in the editor's Introductory Note, readings are given
in two forms. For this e-text, line breaks and numbers were retained
in the simplified version for use with the Notes. In the unchanged
version, each chapter is a single paragraph, with the page-and-line
range given in brackets at the end of each chapter.

To reduce visual clutter, some _italic_ and +boldface+ markup has been
simplified or omitted.]




  The

  GATE TO CÆSAR

  by

  WILLIAM C. COLLAR, A.M.

  Head Master Roxbury Latin School

  BOSTON, U.S.A.
  GINN & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS
  1895


  Copyright, 1891,
  By William C. Collar.
  All Rights Reserved.


  Typography by J. S. Cushing & Co., Boston, U.S.A.
  Presswork by Ginn & Co., Boston, U.S.A.




PREFACE.


The recent discovery of a work of Aristotle has interested and delighted
the whole learned world; but one may venture to say that if, instead,
a book had been found written in the best period of the Latin language
for the amusement or instruction of youth, by some Roman De Foe, or
Goldsmith, or Lamb, or Burnett, there would be ten times the reason
for rejoicing. Unhappily there is no likelihood that we shall ever
congratulate ourselves on such a "find," for probably no such work ever
existed. What a misfortune that it did not occur to Cicero to divert
himself in some leisure hour by writing a story for Roman youth!
Millions of boys and girls in these later ages would have had good
reason to bless his name. Cæsar could have done it; but to him, too, the
gods denied such an inspiration, and we must suffer for it. Seeing that
he had composed a treatise on Latin Grammar, one almost wonders that a
mind so original and fertile should not have conceived the idea of
adapting his Gallic War, or some part of it, to the powers and
comprehension of youth. What measureless gratitude would he not have won
from unborn generations of schoolmasters, who have now to struggle
desperately and often unavailingly to make clear to their pupils the
meaning of his intricate periods, and untwist the strands of his knotty
syntax!

Cæsar is a difficult author. Some parts of his Gallic War are as hard,
or nearly as hard, as any prose Latin that has come down to us. Yet it
has somehow strangely enough become the fashion to read that work first
in a Latin course. My own conviction is that for young learners a year's
reading in easier Latin is not too much before taking up the less
difficult books of the Gallic War. Even then the transition to Cæsar
comes with something of a shock; for the learner is soon and often
brought face to face with sentences that seem to him of most bewildering
intricacy, however they may, as commentators sometimes remark,
beautifully illustrate most important principles of Latin order and
construction. There is a sentence in the second book, by no means the
most difficult one to be found, that extends through eighteen
lines,--that is, something more than half a page,--containing twenty-one
distinct ideas, and having the verb separated from its subject by
ninety-four words.

I know no more disheartening task than that of undertaking to carry a
class unprepared in age and knowledge of the language through Cæsar's
Gallic War. Yet it is precisely this disheartening task that thousands
of teachers are set to do, or set themselves to do, every year. The
results are often dismal enough. Teachers are blamed, they blame
themselves, they blame their pupils. Pupils may sometimes be stupid,
teachers may lack knowledge of the language and the subject, but the
fault may also lie wholly with the author or with the Latin language
itself; if with the latter, there is no help. Latin, it must be
confessed, is an exceedingly difficult language to learn. All the more
reason then why, in attacking it, every unnecessary obstacle should be
removed. We should make our approaches with caution and skill; we should
take it, if possible, _aperto latere_. We should not begin with a
difficult work; or if, in the dearth of Latin suited to the juvenile
mind, this is deemed unavoidable, common sense suggests the query, _why
not remove provisionally[1] from the text those more intricate parts
that discourage the learner and bar the way of progress_?

    [Footnote 1: It is presumed that the learner will subsequently
    read the complete text.]

Cæsar knew how to write his own language well; but he wrote for men, he
wrote with compression and in haste, and there are passages in his works
that are tough reading for a good Latin scholar. It is the fashion to
praise Cæsar's lucidity; but brevity and haste are not conducive to
lucidity.

  "Ther nys no werkman, what so ever he be,
  That may bothe werke wel, and hastily.
  This wol be doon at leyser parfitly."

For my part I confess that I sometimes find him obscure. Moreover, when
I am in doubt as to his meaning and appeal to the commentators, I find
that they generally disagree and sometimes quarrel about the sense.
Therefore to put young learners to reading Cæsar as his text stands,
bristling with difficulties, before they have acquired anything more
than a meagre vocabulary and gained a modicum of insight by some
practice in reading easier Latin, is to set them at a task harder than
that which Pharaoh set the Israelites.

I am of the opinion that, even when a fair working vocabulary has been
acquired through some previous reading, there is no book of the Gallic
War that does not require a certain degree of simplification to bring it
to the level of the powers of young boys and girls. It is this
conviction born of long observation of the vexation of spirit,
discouragement, and waste of time by pupils in wrestling with
difficulties that inevitably floor them, that has prompted me to put my
hand to this work, which, slight as it may seem, has cost me the leisure
of many months. But I shall feel repaid tenfold, if, through this little
book, boys and girls are enabled to read Cæsar with less waste of time,
more easily, with fresher interest, and added sense of power; if, in
other words, it proves in reality what it is in name, a Gate to Cæsar.

A few words will be sufficient to explain the principle on which I have
simplified Cæsar's text, the amount of excision, and the degree of
change. It would have been a comparatively easy task to simplify the
text by the mere process of omission, never deviating from the
_ipsissima verba_ of the author by so much as the change of a mode or
tense. One could do this and still string together the _disjecta membra_
of the text into something like a connected narrative. But that would be
to preserve the integrity of the words at the expense of everything
else,--inner relation, structure, style, spirit. Or the simplification
might be effected by a virtual rewriting of the text, by amplification
rather than suppression, coupled with changes in the collocation of
words, where the arrangement seemed to obscure the meaning and perplex
the learner.

My purpose and plan differed essentially from both these methods. My aim
has been, first, to keep the narrative intact; second, to retain as much
of the text as was consistent with the effort to disburden it of its
greater difficulties; third, to make the fewest practicable changes in
what was retained, save the modification of some verb forms, and the
occasional rendering of indirect into direct discourse; fourth, very
rarely to change the position of a word; finally, never to insert a
word, except now and then to supply a form plainly understood, or to
introduce some connective, like _et_, _tum_, _itaque_, _autem_, _ergo_,
_postremo_.

As to the amount of excision, I find that I have omitted almost exactly
one-fifth of Cæsar's text.

If the beginner in Cæsar reads the simplified text and concurrently
turns the Exercises into Latin, laying firm hold of the grammatical
principles selected for illustration, I believe he will find the
remaining difficulties of the original text not beyond his scope.
I should even hope that he would then read with something of the joy of
conscious power. If the reading of the texts and the writing of the
Exercises should require more time than is usually spent on the second
book of Cæsar, which, however, I doubt, I believe subsequent progress
would still be rapid and satisfactory enough to amount to a net gain and
saving of time.

It has seemed best to mark long vowels, except the vowels of final
syllables and of monosyllables, the rules for which can be readily
learned. I have, however, marked a few monosyllables, as a constant
reminder to teachers who find their old pronunciation clinging to
certain words. We used to say _h{i}s_, _s{i}c_, _n{o}n_, _qu{i}n_,
_h{o}c_. These words, therefore, I have marked. On the other hand, one
is in no danger of saying _d{e}_, _h{i}_, _s{i}_, _pr{o}_, for old
habit would not mislead.

I take pleasure in acknowledging my obligations to Mr. Alfred G. Rolfe
for several useful criticisms, and to Miss Caroline Ober Stone for
valuable corrections and for carefully reading the proof-sheets as far
as the vocabularies. To Mr. Clarence W. Gleason I am specially indebted.
But for his timely and generous aid in preparing both vocabularies, the
publication of this book must have been very considerably delayed.

WILLIAM C. COLLAR.

SEACONNET, July 25, 1891.




CONTENTS.


                                        PAGE
  Introductory Note                        x
  Simplified Text                       1-22
  Complete Text                        23-41
  Notes on Both Texts                  43-71
  Exercises on Simplified Text         73-88
  Vocabulary                          89-123
  Etymological Vocabulary            125-141




NOTE ON THE USE OF THE BOOK.


The Simplified Text and the Exercises based upon it are of the first
importance. The _viva voce_ translation of the Exercises, followed by
the writing of them, will illustrate and help to implant in the memory
the most important principles of syntax met with in the text. Let the
teacher insist upon thorough work here, and he may safely omit other
syntactical instruction.

But little power of reading Latin can be gained without making the
acquisition of a working vocabulary a distinct object. The Latin
synonyms and the Etymological Vocabulary may be made useful agents to
that end. If the words added to each chapter are read aloud, reviewed,
and compared where backward references are made, the learner will
acquire a useful stock of synonyms easily, naturally, and with small
expenditure of time.

It is often easier to retain in mind a number of words, grouped
according to some principle of similarity or contrast, than a single
word with nothing to hook it to the memory. For this reason it is
recommended that the Etymological Vocabulary be often pressed into the
service. Suppose, for example, the word _conspectus_ occurs in the
lesson. If the teacher will turn to page 138 and have the ten words read
out under the root SPEC, he will multiply several times the chances that
this particular word will be remembered on its next occurrence. He will
have done much more. He will have increased the chances that nine other
words will be lodged in the memory; and to each one a fresh interest
will be added by its being seen in relation, not as an isolated, and
therefore barren, fact.

The first vocabulary may be used for comparing in the text the different
meanings and uses of the same word. It is through such comparisons that
one gets at the heart and spirit of the language, while cultivating at
the same time a mental habit of great value.

Having read the Simplified Text, the learner should be well equipped for
wrestling with the difficulties that remain in the unchanged text, for
he is already familiar with the thought and the language. Comparison of
the two texts by the teacher, so far as time permits, may now be made to
illustrate important principles, as of indirect discourse, which are
here and there discussed in the notes.




CÆSAR'S GALLIC WAR


BOOK II.

B.C. 57; A.U.C. 697.


THE BELGIAN LEAGUE DEFEATED.

SIMPLIFIED TEXT.


_The Belgæ form a league against the Romans._

  1. Cum esset Caesar in citeriôre Gallia, crêbri ad eum
  rûmôres adferêbantur. Litteris item Labiêni certior fîêbat
  omnes Belgas contra populum Rômânum coniûrâre
  obsidêsque inter se dare. Coniûrandi hae erant causae:
  prîmum verêbantur ne ad se exercitus noster addûcerêtur;         5
  deinde ab nônnûllis Gallis sollicitâbantur. Hi Germânos
  diûtius in Gallia versâri nôluerant et populi Rômâni
  exercitum hiemâre atque inveterâscere in Gallia moleste
  ferêbant. Nônnûlli môbilitâte et levitâte animi novis
  imperiis studêbant. Ab nônnûllis etiam sollicitâbantur,         10
  quod in Gallia a potentiôribus atque iis qui ad condûcendos
  homines facultâtes habêbant, vulgo rêgna occupâbantur;
  qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro cônsequi
  poterant.

    +crêber+, _frequens_.
    +vereor+, _timeo_.
    +deinde+, _tum_.
    +versor+: _maneo_, _sum_.
    +moleste+, _graviter_.
    +studeo+, _cupio_.


_Cæsar levies two legions and marches against them._

  2. Hîs nûntiis litterîsque commôtus est Caesar. Duas
  legiônes in citeriôre Gallia novas cônscrîpsit. In interiôrem
  Galliam qui hâs legiônes dêdûceret Q. Pedium
  lêgâtum mîsit. Ipse, cum prîmum pâbuli côpia esse
  inciperet, ad exercitum vênit. Senones fînitimi Belgis           5
  erant. Ea quae apud Belgas geruntur côgnôscunt Caesaremque
  de hîs rêbus certiôrem faciunt. Hi cônstanter
  omnes nûntiâvêrunt manus côgi, exercitum in ûnum locum
  condûci. Tum vêro nôn dubitâvit Caesar quîn ad eos
  proficîscerêtur. Itaque castra movet diêbusque circiter         10
  quîndecim ad fînes Belgârum pervenit.

    +nûntius+, _rûmor_.
    +fînitimus+: _vîcînus_, _propînquus_.
    +gero+: _ago_, _facio_.
    +côgo+, _conligo_.
    +condûco+, _conligo_.
    +pervenio+, _accêdo_.


_The Remi at once show the white feather._

  3. Eo de imprôvîso celeriterque vênit Caesar. Rêmi
  ad eum lêgâtos Iccium et Andocumborium mîsêrunt, qui
  dîxêrunt se omnia in fidem atque in potestâtem populi
  Rômâni permittere. "Rêmi neque cum Belgis reliquis
  cônsênsêrunt neque contra populum Rômânum coniûrâvêrunt.         5
  Parâti sunt obsides dare et Caesaris imperâta
  facere et eum oppidis recipere et frûmento cêterîsque rêbus
  iuvâre. Reliqui omnes Belgae in armis sunt. Germâni,
  qui cis Rhênum incolunt, sêse cum hîs coniûnxêrunt.
  Tantus est eôrum omnium furor ut ne Suessiônes quidem           10
  dêterrêre possint Rêmi. Suessiônes frâtres Rêmôrum cônsanguineîque
  sunt eôdemque iûre et îsdem lêgibus ûtuntur.
  Ûnum imperium ûnumque magistrâtum cum iis habent."

    +de imprôvîso+: _subito_, _repente_.
    +permitto+, _dêdo_.
    +cônsentio+: _coniûro_, _me coniungo_.
    +dêterreo+, _dissuâdeo_.


_Cæsar learns the number of the enemy's forces._

  4. Cum ab hîs quaereret quae cîvitâtes quantaeque in
  armis essent et quid in bello possent, sîc reperiêbat:
  plêrîque Belgae sunt orti ab Germânis Rhênumque antîquitus
  trâducti ibi cônsêdêrunt, Gallôsque qui ea loca
  incolêbant expulêrunt. Sôli fuêrunt qui Teutonos Cimbrôsque      5
  intra fînes suos ingredi prohibuêrunt. Qua ex
  re fîêbat ut mâgnam sibi auctôritâtem mâgnôsque spîritus
  in re mîlitâri sûmerent. De numero eôrum omnia se
  habêre explôrâta Rêmi dîcêbant. Quantam quisque multitûdinem
  in commûni Belgârum concilio ad id bellum pollicitus            10
  esset côgnôverant. Plûrimum inter eos Bellovaci
  et virtûte et auctôritâte et hominum numero valêbant.
  Hi poterant cônficere armâta mîlia centum; polliciti sunt
  ex eo numero êlêcta sexâginta tôtîusque belli imperium
  sibi postulâbant. Suessiônes Rêmôrum erant fînitimi;            15
  lâtissimos ferâcissimôsque agros possidêbant. Apud eos
  fuit rêx nostra etiam memoria Divitiacus, tôtîus Galliae
  potentissimus, qui cum mâgnae partis hârum regiônum
  tum etiam Britanniae imperium obtinuit. Nunc erat rêx
  Galba; ad hunc propter iûstitiam prûdentiamque suam             20
  belli summa dêlâta est.

    +quaero+, _interrogo_.
    +reperio+, _côgnôsco_.
    +orior+, _nâscor_.
    +cônsîdo+, _me colloco_.
    +spîritus+: _adrogantia_, _animi_.
    +explôro+, _côgnôsco_.
    +valeo+, _possum_.
    +cônficio+, _comparo_.
    +ferax+, _fertilis_.
    +summa+: _cûra_, _imperium_.


_He takes hostages from the Remi and crosses the Axona._

  5. Caesar omnem senâtum ad se convenîre prîncipumque
  lîberos obsides ad se addûci iûssit. Quae omnia ab hîs
  dîligenter ad diem facta sunt. Ipse Divitiacum Aeduum
  mâgno opere cohortâtus est. Rei pûblicae interest manus
  hostium distinêri, ne cum tanta multitûdine ûno tempore          5
  cônflîgendum sit. Id fieri potest, si suas côpias Aedui
  in fînes Bellovacôrum intrôdûxerint et eôrum agros populâri
  coeperint. Hîs mandâtis eum ab se dîmittit. Postea
  Caesar omnes Belgârum côpias in ûnum locum coâctas
  ad se venîre vîdit neque iam longe abesse. Hôc ab iis           10
  quôs mîserat explôrâtôribus et ab Rêmis côgnôvit. Tum
  flûmen Axonam exercitum trâdûcere mâtûrâvit atque ibi
  castra posuit. Quae res latus ûnum castrôrum rîpis flûminis
  mûniêbat et post eum quae essent tûta ab hostibus
  reddêbat. Commeâtus etiam ab Rêmis reliquîsque cîvitâtibus      15
  sine perîculo portâri poterant. In eo flûmine pôns
  erat. Ibi praesidium pônit et in altera parte flûminis
  Q. Titurium Sabînum lêgâtum cum sex cohortibus relîquit;
  castra in altitûdinem pedum XII vâllo fossâque
  duodêvîginti pedum mûnîre iubet.                                20

    +iubeo+, _impero_.
    +mâgno opere+, _vehementer_.
    +interest+, _pertinet_.
    +distineo+, _dîvido_.
    +cônflîgo+: _pûgno_, _dîmico_.
    +populor+, _vâsto_.
    +côgo+, _condûco_, 2.
    +côgnôsco+, _reperio_, 4.
    +mâtûro+, _propero_.
    +commeâtus+, _cibus_.


_How the Belgæ lay siege to a town._

  6. Ab hîs castris oppidum Rêmôrum nômine Bibrax
  aberat mîlia passuum octo. Id ex itinere mâgno impetu
  Belgae oppûgnâre coepêrunt. Aegre eo die sustentâtum
  est. Gallôrum eadem atque Belgârum oppûgnâtio est
  haec. Circumiecta multitûdine hominum tôtis moenibus             5
  undique in mûrum lapides iaciunt. Ubi mûrus dêfênsôribus
  nûdâtus est, testûdine facta portas succêdunt mûrumque
  subruunt. Quod tum facile fîêbat. Nam cum tanta
  multitûdo lapides âc têla cônicerent, in mûro cônsistendi
  potestas erat nûlli. Postrêmo fînem oppûgnandi nox              10
  fêcit. Tum Iccius Rêmus, qui oppido praefuerat, nûntium
  ad Caesarem mittit: nisi subsidium sibi submittâtur,
  sêse diûtius sustinêre nôn posse.

    +tôtus+, _omnis_.
    +undique+, _ex omni parte_.
    +ubi+, _cum_.
    +nûdo+, _prîvo_.
    +succêdo+: _accêdo_, _subeo_.
    +subruo+, _suffodio_.
    +cônsisto+, _sto_.
    +praesum+, _praefectus sum_.
    +subsidium+, _auxilium_.
    +sustineo+, _sustento_.


_They abandon the siege and turn against Cæsar._

  7. Eo de media nocte Caesar Numidas et Crêtas sagittârios
  et funditôres Baleâres subsidio oppidânis mittit;
  quôrum adventu hostibus spes potiundi oppidi discessit.
  Itaque paulisper apud oppidum morâti agrôsque Rêmôrum
  dêpopulâti ad castra Caesaris omnibus côpiis contendêrunt        5
  et ab mîlibus passuum minus duôbus castra
  posuêrunt; quae castra, ut fûmo atque îgnibus sîgnificâbâtur,
  amplius mîlibus passuum octo in lâtitûdinem
  patêbant.

    +subsidium+, _auxilium_, 6.
    +potior+, _occupo_.
    +discêdo+, _abeo_.
    +paulisper+, _nôn diu_.
    +moror+, _cunctor_.
    +dêpopulor+, _vâsto_.
    +contendo+, _mâtûro_, 5.
    +pateo+, _pertineo_.


_Cæsar awaits the attack of the enemy._

  8. Caesar prîmo propter multitûdinem hostium et
  propter eximiam opîniônem virtûtis proelio supersedêre
  statuit; cotîdie tamen quid hostis virtûte posset et quid
  nostri audêrent perîclitâbâtur. Locus erat pro castris ad
  aciem înstruendam nâtûra opportûnus atque idôneus. Is            5
  autem collis, ubi castra posita erant, paululum ex plânitie
  êditus tantum adversus in lâtitûdinem patêbat quantum
  loci acies înstrûcta occupâre poterat. Atque ex utrâque
  parte lateris dêiectus habêbat, et in frôntem lêniter fastîgâtus
  paulâtim ad plânitiem redîbat. Ab utrôque latere                10
  êius collis trânsversam fossam obdûxit circiter passuum
  quadringentôrum et ad extrêmas fossas castella cônstituit
  ibique tormenta conlocâvit, ne hostes ab lateribus pûgnantes
  suos circumvenîre possent. Hôc facto duâbus
  legiônibus quâs proxime cônscrîpserat in castris relîctis,      15
  reliquas sex legiônes pro castris in acie cônstituit. Hostes
  item suas côpias ex castris êductas înstrûxerant.

    +eximius+: _excellens_, _êgregius_.
    +opînio+, _fâma_.
    +supersedeo+, _abstineo_.
    +perîclitor+: _tento_, _experior_.
    +idôneus+: _aptus_, _commodus_.
    +dêiectus+, _dêclîvitas_.
    +fastîgâtus+, _adclîvis_.
    +conloco+, _pôno_.


_Finally the enemy make a dash to cross the Axona._

  9. Palus erat nôn mâgna inter nostrum atque hostium
  exercitum. Hanc si nostri trânsîrent hostes exspectâbant.
  Interim proelio equestri inter duas acies contendêbâtur.
  Ubi neutri trânseundae êius palûdis initium
  faciunt, secundiôre equitum proelio nostris Caesar suos          5
  in castra redûxit. Hostes prôtinus ex eo loco ad flûmen
  Axonam contendêrunt, quod esse post nostra castra
  dêmônstrâtum est. Partem suârum côpiârum trâdûcere
  cônâti sunt, ut castellum cui praeerat Q. Titurius lêgâtus
  expûgnârent pontemque interscinderent; si minus potuissent,     10
  ut agros Rêmôrum populârentur commeâtûque
  nostros prohibêrent.

    +initium+, _prîncipium_.
    +secundus+, _prôsperus_.
    +prôtinus+: _statim_, _extemplo_, _repente_, _subito_.
    +contendo+, _mâtûro_, 7.
    +praesum+, _praefectus sum_, 6.
    +interscindo+, _abrumpo_.
    +commeâtus+, _cibus_, 5.


_A battle follows, the Belgæ are defeated and disperse._

  10. Caesar omnem equitâtum et levis armâtûrae Numidas,
  funditôres sagittâriôsque pontem trâdûcit atque
  ad eos contendit. Âcriter in eo loco pûgnâtum est. Hostes
  impedîtos nostri in flûmine adgressi mâgnum eôrum
  numerum occîdêrunt. Prîmos qui trânsierant equitâtu              5
  circumventos interfêcêrunt. Hostes, ubi de expûgnando
  oppido spem se fefellisse intellêxêrunt neque nostros in
  locum inîquiôrem prôgredi vîdêrunt atque ipsos res frûmentâria
  dêficere coepit, concilium convocâvêrunt. Cônstituêrunt
  optimum esse domum suam quemque reverti.                        10
  Cônstituêrunt etiam ut quôrum in fînes prîmum Rômâni
  exercitum intrôdûxissent ad eos dêfendendos undique
  convenîrent. Quod eo cônsilio fêcêrunt, ut potius in suis
  quam in aliênis fînibus dêcertârent. Ad eam sententiam
  haec ratio eos dêdûxit, quod Divitiacum atque Aeduos            15
  fînibus Bellovacôrum adpropînquâre côgnôverant. Hîs
  persuâdêri ut diûtius morârentur nôn poterat.

    +armâtûra+, _arma_.
    +âcriter+, _vehementer_.
    +adgredior+, _adorior_.
    +occîdo+, _concîdo_.
    +prôgredior+: _prôcêdo_, _prôdeo_.
    +cônstituo+, _statuo_.
    +revertor+, _redeo_.
    +dêcerto+: _pûgno_, _dîmico_.
    +sententia+, _cônsilium_.
    +moror+, _cunctor_, 7.


_They are pursued with awful slaughter._

  11. Ea re cônstitûta, secunda vigilia mâgno cum strepitu
  âc tumultu castris êgressi, nûllo certo ôrdine neque
  imperio, fêcêrunt ut cônsimilis fugae profectio vidêrêtur.
  Hâc re statim Caesar per speculâtôres côgnita însidias
  veritus exercitum equitâtumque castris continuit. Prîma          5
  lûce omnem equitâtum qui novissimum âgmen morârêtur
  praemîsit. T. Labiênum lêgâtum cum legiônibus tribus
  subsequi iûssit. Hi novissimos adorti et multa mîlia
  passuum prôsecûti mâgnam multitûdinem eôrum fugientium
  concîdêrunt. Ii ad quos ventum erat cônsistêbant                10
  fortiterque impetum nostrôrum sustinêbant; sed priôres,
  quod abesse a perîculo vidêbantur, exaudîto clâmôre perturbâtis
  ôrdinibus omnes in fuga sibi praesidium pônêbant.
  Ita sine ûllo perîculo mâgnam eôrum multitûdinem
  nostri interfêcêrunt sub occâsumque sôlis dêstitêrunt sêque     15
  in castra, ut erat imperâtum, recêpêrunt.

    +cônstituo+, _statuo_, 10.
    +strepitus+: _clâmor_, _fremitus_.
    +cônsimilis+, _persimilis_.
    +vereor+, _timeo_, 1.
    +moror+, _cunctor_, 7.
    +subsequor+: _prôsequor_, _însequor_.
    +adorior+, _adgredior_, 10.
    +concîdo+, _occîdo_, 10.
    +cônsisto+, _sto_, 6.
    +sustineo+, _sustento_, 6.


_A forced march and attack on Noviodunum. The town surrenders._

  12. Postrîdie êius diêi Caesar in fînes Suessiônum
  exercitum dûxit et mâgno itinere cônfecto ad oppidum
  Noviodûnum contendit. Id ex itinere oppûgnâre cônâtus,
  quod vacuum ab dêfênsôribus esse audiêbat, expûgnâre
  nôn potuit. Interim omnis ex fuga Suessiônum multitûdo           5
  in oppidum proxima nocte convênit. Celeriter vîneis
  ad oppidum âctis, aggere iacto turribusque cônstitûtis,
  mâgnitûdine operum et celeritâte Rômânôrum permôti
  sunt Suessiônes. Itaque lêgâtos ad Caesarem de dêditiône
  mittunt et petentibus Rêmis ut cônservârentur impetrant.        10
  petrant.

    +cônficio+, _perficio_.
    +contendo+, _propero_.
    +vacuus+: _carens_, _nûdus_.
    +interim+, _interea_.
    +ago+: _pello_, _dûco_, _traho_.
    +permoveo+, _commoveo_.
    +dêditio+, _trâditio_.
    +impetro+, _cônsequor_.


_The Bellovaci also submit at Cæsar's approach._

  13. Caesar obsidibus acceptis armîsque omnibus ex
  oppido trâditis in dêditiônem Suessiônes accêpit exercitumque
  in Bellovacos dûxit. Qui cum se suaque omnia
  in oppidum Bratuspantium contulissent, atque ab eo
  oppido Caesar cum exercitu circiter mîlia passuum quînque        5
  abesset, omnes mâiôres nâtu ex oppido êgressi manus
  ad Caesarem tendere et vôce sîgnificâre coepêrunt sêse in
  êius fidem âc potestâtem venîre. Item, cum ad oppidum
  accessisset, pueri mulierêsque ex mûro passis manibus
  suo môre pâcem ab Rômânis petiêrunt.                            10

    +trâdo+: _do_, _dêdo_.
    +me cônfero+: _me recipio_, _eo_.
    +êgredior+, _exeo_.
    +coepi+, _incêpi_.
    +pueri+, _lîberi_.
    +pando+, _tendo_.
    +môs+, _cônsuêtûdo_.
    +peto+, _ôro_.


_Divitiacus pleads earnestly for the Bellovaci._

  14. Pro hîs Divitiacus facit verba: "Bellovaci omni
  tempore in fide atque amîcitia cîvitâtis Aeduae fuêrunt:
  impulsi a suis prîncipibus, qui dîcêbant Aeduos omnes
  indîgnitâtes contumêliâsque perferre, ab Aeduis dêfêcêrunt
  et populo Rômâno bellum intulêrunt. Ii qui êius                  5
  cônsili prîncipes fuêrunt in Britanniam profûgêrunt.
  Petunt nôn sôlum Bellovaci sed etiam pro hîs Aedui ut
  tua clêmentia âc mânsuêtûdine in eos ûtâris. Quod si
  fêceris, Aeduôrum auctôritâtem apud omnes Belgas amplificâbis,
  quôrum auxiliis atque opibus, si qua bella                      10
  incidunt, sustentâre cônsuêrunt."

    +impello+: _incito_, _indûco_.
    +contumêlia+, _iniûria_.
    +dêficio+: _dêsero_.
    +mânsuêtûdo+, _lênitas_.
    +auctôritas+, _grâtia_.
    +amplifico+, _augeo_.
    +sustento+, _sustineo_, 6.
    +cônsuêsco+, _soleo_.


_The temperance, courage, and patriotism of the Nervii._

  15. Caesar honôris Divitiaci atque Aeduôrum causa
  sêse eos in fidem receptûrum et cônservâtûrum dîxit;
  quod erat cîvitas mâgna inter Belgas auctôritâte, sexcentos
  obsides poposcit. Hîs trâditis omnibusque armis
  ex oppido conlâtis, ab eo loco in fînes Ambiânôrum pervênit.     5
  Eôrum fînes Nervii attingêbant; quôrum de
  nâtûra môribusque Caesar cum quaereret, sîc reperiêbat:
  Nûllus aditus erat ad eos mercâtôribus; nihil patiêbantur
  vîni reliquârumque rêrum înferri, quod iis rêbus
  relanguêscere animos et remitti virtûtem exîstimâbant:          10
  erant homines feri mâgnaeque virtûtis; increpitâbant
  atque incûsâbant reliquos Belgas, qui se populo Rômâno
  dêdidissent.

    +auctôritas+, _grâtia_, 14.
    +posco+, _impero_.
    +cônfero+, _côgo_, 2.
    +attingo+, _contingo_.
    +aditus+, _accessus_.
    +patior+, _sino_.
    +relanguêsco+, _effêminor_.
    +remitto+, _minuo_.
    +incûso+, _accûso_.
    +dêdo+, _permitto_.


_Encamped on the Sabis the Nervii await the coming of Cæsar._

  16. Cum per eôrum fînes trîduum iter fêcisset, inveniêbat
  ex captîvis Sabim flûmen ab castris suis nôn
  amplius mîlia passuum x abesse. Trâns id flûmen omnes
  Nervii cônsêderant adventumque ibi Rômânôrum exspectâbant.
  Exspectâbantur etiam ab hîs Aduâtucôrum côpiae                   5
  atque erant in itinere. Mulieres quîque per aetâtem ad
  pûgnam inûtiles vidêrentur in eum locum coniêcerant,
  quo propter palûdes exercitui aditus nôn esset.

    +cônsîdo+, _me colloco_, 4.
    +cônicio+, _dêpôno_.
    +aditus+, 15.


_They plan to attack Cæsar's advance guard._

  17. Hîs rêbus côgnitis explôrâtôres centuriônêsque
  praemittit qui locum idôneum castris dêligant. Cum ex
  dêditîciis Belgis reliquîsque Gallis complûres Caesarem
  secûti ûna iter facerent, quîdam ex hîs nocte ad Nervios
  pervênêrunt. Hîs dêmônstrârunt inter singulas legiônes           5
  impedîmentôrum mâgnum numerum intercêdere, neque
  esse quicquam negôti, cum prîma legio in castra vênisset,
  hanc sub sarcinis adorîri; qua pulsa futûrum ut reliquae
  legiônes contra cônsistere nôn audêrent. Nervii autem
  antîquitus, quo facilius fînitimôrum equitâtum impedîrent,      10
  teneris arboribus incîsis atque înflexis, crêbrîsque
  in lâtitûdinem râmis ênâtis, et rubis sentibusque interiectis,
  effêcerant ut înstar mûri hae saepes mûnîmenta
  praebêrent, quo nôn modo nôn intrâri sed ne perspici
  quidem posset. Hîs rêbus cum iter âgminis nostri impedîrêtur,   15
  nôn omittendum sibi cônsilium Nervii exîstimâvêrunt.

    +idôneus+: _aptus_, _commodus_, 8.
    +dêligo+, _êligo_.
    +intercêdo+, _intervenio_.
    +sarcinae+: _impedîmenta_, _onera_.
    +adorior+, _adgredior_, 11.
    +cônsisto+, _sto_, 6.
    +incîdo+, _accîdo_.
    +înstar+: _fôrma_, _similitûdo_.
    +omitto+, _neglego_.
    +exîstimo+, _puto_.


_The Roman camping-ground and the position of the enemy._

  18. Loci nâtûra erat haec, quem locum nostri castris
  dêlêgerant. Collis ab summo acquâliter dêclîvis ad flûmen
  Sabim, quod supra nôminâvimus, vergêbat. Ab eo flûmine
  pari adclîvitâte collis nâscêbâtur, ab superiôre parte
  silvestris ut nôn facile intrôrsus perspici posset. Intra        5
  eas silvas hostes in occulto sêse continêbant; in aperto
  loco secundum flûmen paucae statiônes equitum vidêbantur.
  Flûminis erat altitûdo pedum circiter trium.

    +summum+, _culmen_.
    +dêclîvis+, _prôclîvis_.
    +vergo+, _pertineo_.
    +nâscor+, _orior_, 4.
    +intrôrsus+, _intra_.
    +in occulto+, _abditus_.
    +statio+, _custôdia_.
    +circiter+, _ad_.


_The plan of attack is skilfully carried out by the Nervii._

  19. Caesar equitâtu praemîsso subsequêbâtur omnibus
  côpiis. Sed quod ad hostes adpropînquâbat, cônsuêtûdine
  sua sex legiônes expedîtas dûcêbat; post eas
  tôtîus exercitus impedîmenta conlocârat; inde duae legiônes,
  quae proxime cônscrîptae erant, tôtum âgmen claudêbant           5
  praesidiôque impedîmentis erant. Equites nostri,
  cum funditôribus sagittâriîsque flûmen trânsgressi, cum
  hostium equitâtu proelium commîsêrunt. Illi se identidem
  in silvas ad suos recipiêbant âc rûrsus ex silva in
  nostros impetum faciêbant. Interim legiônes sex, quae           10
  prîmae vênerant, opere dîmênso castra mûnîre coepêrunt.
  Ubi prîma impedîmenta nostri exercitus ab iis qui in
  silvis abditi latêbant vîsa sunt, subito omnibus côpiis
  prôvolâvêrunt impetumque in nostros equites fêcêrunt.
  Hîs facile pulsis âc prôturbâtis, incrêdibili celeritâte ad     15
  flûmen dêcucurrêrunt, ut paene ûno tempore ad silvas et
  in flûmine et iam in manibus nostris hostes vidêrentur.
  Eâdem autem celeritâte adverso colle ad nostra castra
  atque eos qui in opere occupâti erant contendêrunt.

    +subsequor+, _prôsequor_, 11.
    +conloco+, _pôno_, 8.
    +trânsgredior+, _trânseo_.
    +identidem+, _iterum atque iterum_.
    +rûrsus+, _iterum_.
    +interim+, _interea_, 12.
    +dîmêtior+, _mêtior_.
    +lateo+, _me cêlo_.
    +prôvolo+, _prôruo_.
    +prôturbo+, _fugo_.
    +paene+, _fere_.
    +contendo+, _propero_, 7.


_But the soldiers and lieutenants know what to do._

  20. Caesari omnia ûno tempore erant agenda: vêxillum
  prôpônendum, sîgnum tuba dandum, ab opere revocandi
  mîlites, acies înstruenda, mîlites cohortandi, sîgnum dandum.
  Quârum rêrum mâgnam partem temporis brevitas
  et successus hostium impediêbat. Sed erat subsidio               5
  scientia atque ûsus mîlitum, quod superiôribus proeliis
  exercitâti, nôn minus commode ipsi sibi praescrîbere
  quam ab aliis docêri poterant. Praeterea ab opere singulîsque
  legiônibus singulos lêgâtos Caesar discêdere
  vetuerat. Hi propter propînquitâtem et celeritâtem              10
  hostium nihil iam Caesaris imperium exspectâbant, sed
  per se quae vidêbantur administrâbant.

    +prôpôno+, _ostendo_.
    +successus+, _accessus_, 15.
    +subsidium+, _auxilium_, 6.
    +ûsus+, _experientia_.
    +exercitâtus+, _perîtus_.
    +commode+: _apte_, _bene_.
    +praescrîbo+, _praecipio_.
    +veto+, _prohibeo_.
    +propînquitas+, _vîcînitas_.
    +administro+: _prôvideo_, _ago_.


_Fighting begins before the soldiers can arm themselves._

  21. Caesar necessâriis rêbus imperâtis ad cohortandos
  mîlites dêcucurrit et ad legiônem decimam dêvênit.
  Mîlites nôn longiôre ôrâtiône cohortâtus quam uti suae
  prîstinae virtûtis memoriam retinêrent neu perturbârentur
  animo hostiumque impetum fortiter sustinêrent,                   5
  quod nôn longe hostes aberant, proeli committendi sîgnum
  dedit. Atque in alteram partem item cohortandi
  causa profectus pûgnantibus occurrit. Temporis tanta
  fuit exiguitas hostiumque tam parâtus ad dîmicandum
  animus, ut nôn modo ad însîgnia adcommodanda, sed               10
  etiam ad galeas induendas scûtîsque tegimenta dêtrûdenda
  tempus dêfuerit. Quam in partem quisque ab opere câsu
  dêvênit quaeque prîma sîgna cônspêxit, ad haec cônstitit,
  ne in quaerendis suis pûgnandi tempus dîmitteret.

    +dêvenio+, _pervenio_.
    +prîstinus+: _vetus_, _antîquus_.
    +perturbo+, _commoveo_, 12.
    +sustineo+, _sustento_, 6.
    +occurro+, _inc{i}do_.
    +exiguitas+, _brevitas_.
    +adcommodo+, _apto_.
    +induo+, _indûco_.
    +dêtrûdo+, _dêtraho_.
    +câsu+, _fôrte_.
    +cônspicio+, _cônspicor_.
    +dîmitto+, _âmitto_.


_All is confusion in the battle; the commander can do little._

  22. Înstrûcto exercitu magis ut loci nâtûra dêiectusque
  collis et necessitas temporis quam ut rei mîlitâris
  ratio atque ôrdo postulâbat, fîêbat ut aliae legiônes alia
  in parte hostibus resisterent; saepibus autem dênsissimis,
  ut ante dêmônstrâvimus, interiectis prôspectus impediêbâtur,     5
  ut neque certa subsidia conlocâri, neque ab ûno
  omnia imperia administrâri possent. Itaque in tanta
  rêrum inîquitâte, fôrtûnae quoque êventus varii sequêbantur.

    +dêiectus+, _dêclîvitas_, 8.
    +ratio+, _scientia_.
    +intericio+, _interpôno_.
    +administro+, _ago_, 20.
    +inîquitas+, _varietas_.
    +êventus+, _câsus_.


_The battle seems to be going against Cæsar._

  23. Legiônis nônae et decimae mîlites, ut in sinistra
  parte acie cônstiterant, Atrebates cursu âc lassitûdine
  exanimâtos vulneribusque cônfectos celeriter ex loco
  superiôre in flûmen compulêrunt. Tum eos trânsîre
  cônantes însecûti, gladiis mâgnam partem eôrum                   5
  interfêcêrunt. Ipsi trânsîre flûmen nôn dubitâvêrunt et in
  locum inîquum prôgressi, hostes redintegrâto proelio in
  fugam côniêcêrunt. Item alia in parte dîversae duae
  legiônes, ûndecima et octâva, ex loco superiôre in ipsis
  flûminis rîpis proeliâbantur. At tôtis fere a frônte et         10
  ab sinistra parte nûdâtis castris, omnes Nervii cônfertissimo
  âgmine, duce Boduôgnâto, qui summam imperi
  tenêbat, ad eum locum contendêrunt; quôrum pars aperto
  latere legiônes circumvenîre, pars summum castrôrum
  locum petere coepit.                                            15

    +lassitûdo+, _dêfatîgâtio_.
    +cônfectus+, _dêfessus_.
    +compello+, _ago_.
    +redintegro+, _renovo_.
    +cônfertus+, _dênsus_.
    +summa+, _cûra_, 4.
    +contendo+, _propero_, 12.
    +peto+, _accurro_.


_It is beginning to look very dark for the Romans._

  24. Eôdem tempore equites nostri levisque armâtûrae
  pedites, qui cum iis ûna fuerant, cum se in castra reciperent,
  hostibus occurrêbant âc rûrsus aliam in partem
  fugam petêbant; et câlônes, praedandi causa êgressi,
  cum respêxissent et hostes in nostris castris versâri            5
  vîdissent, praecipites fugae sêse mandâbant. Simul
  eôrum qui cum impedîmentis veniêbant clâmor fremitusque
  oriêbâtur, aliîque aliam in partem perterriti ferêbantur.
  Quibus omnibus rêbus permôti sunt equites
  Trêveri, qui auxili causa ab cîvitâte ad Caesarem mîssi         10
  vênerant. Ergo cum multitûdine hostium castra complêri,
  legiônes premi et paene circumventas tenêri, câlônes,
  equites, funditôres in omnes partes fugere vîdissent,
  dêspêrâtis nostris rêbus, domum contendêrunt atque Rômânos
  pulsos superâtôsque cîvitâti renûntiâvêrunt.                    15

    +armâtûra+, _arma_, 10.
    +me recipio+, _me cônfero_, 13.
    +occurro+, _inc{i}do_, 21.
    +êgredior+, _exeo_, 13.
    +versor+, _sum occupâtus_, 1.
    +mando+, _commendo_.
    +fremitus+, _strepitus_, 11.
    +orior+, _nâscor_, 4.
    +premo+, _urgeo_.
    +paene+, _fere_, 19.
    +pello+: _fugo_, _prôturbo_, 19.
    +supero+, _vinco_.


_Will Cæsar's coolness and courage save his army?_

  25. Caesar ab decimae legiônis cohortâtiône ad dextrum
  cornu profectus suos urgêri et duodecimae legiônis
  cônfertos mîlites sibi ipsos ad pûgnam esse impedîmento
  vîdit. Quartae cohortis omnes centuriônes occîsi sunt
  et, sîgnifero interfecto, sîgnum est âmîssum. Reliquârum         5
  cohortium omnes fere centuriônes aut vulnerâti aut
  occîsi sunt, in hîs prîmipîlus P. Sextius Baculus, fortissimus
  vir, multis gravibusque vulneribus cônfectus ut iam
  se sustinêre nôn posset. Hîs rêbus reliquos esse tardiôres
  vîdit Caesar et nônnullos dêserto proelio excêdere âc têla      10
  vîtâre; hostes autem neque a fronte ex înferiôre loco
  subeuntes intermittere et ab utrôque latere înstâare, et
  rem esse in angusto, neque ûllum esse subsidium quod
  submitti posset. Tum vêro scûto ûni mîliti dêtracto,
  quod ipse eo sine scûto vênerat, in prîmam aciem prôcessit,     15
  centuriônibusque nôminâtim appellâtis, reliquos
  cohortâtus mîlites sîgna înferre et manipulos laxâre iûssit,
  quo facilius gladiis ûti possent. Cûius adventu spe inlâta
  mîlitibus âc redintegrâto animo paulum hostium impetus
  tardâtus est.                                                   20

    +urgeo+, _premo_, 24.
    +cônfertus+, _dênsus_, 23.
    +sîgnifer+, _aquilifer_.
    +âmitto+, _dîmitto_, 21.
    +fere+, _paene_, 19.
    +cônfectus+, _dêfessus_, 23.
    +excêdo+, _exeo_.
    +subeo+, _succêdo_.
    +intermitto+: _dêsino_, _dêsisto_.
    +însto+: _urgeo_, _premo_, 24.
    +dêtraho+, _rapio_.
    +laxo+, _aperio_.
    +înfero+ (2): _do_, _adfero_.
    +redintegro+, _renovo_, 23.


_A shifting scene. Pull Romans, pull Nervii!_

  26. Caesar cum septimam legiônem, quae iûxta cônstiterat,
  item urgêri ab hoste vîdisset, tribûnos mîlitum
  monuit ut paulâtim sêse legiônes coniungerent. Quo
  facto, cum alius alii subsidium ferret, audâcius resistere
  âc fortius pûgnâre coepêrunt. Interim mîlites legiônum           5
  duârum, quae in novissimo âgmine praesidio impedîmentis
  fuerant, proelio nûntiâto cursu incitâto in summo colle
  ab hostibus cônspiciêbantur; et T. Labiênus castris hostium
  potîtus decimam legiônem subsidio nostris mîsit.
  Qui cum quo in loco res esset, quantôque in perîculo castra     10
  et legiônes et imperâtor versârêtur, côgnôvissent,
  nihil ad celeritâtem sibi reliqui fêcêrunt.

    +iûxta+, _prope_.
    +cônsisto+, 6.
    +urgeo+, 25.
    +paulâtim+, _gradâtim_.
    +interim+, _interea_, 12.
    +cônspicio+, _video_.
    +potior+, _occupo_, 7.
    +versor+, _sum_, 1.
    +côgnôsco+, _reperio_, 4.


_In the fierce wrestle the brave Nervii go under._

  27. Hôrum adventu tanta rêrum commûtâtio est facta
  ut nostri, etiam qui vulneribus cônfecti prôcubuissent,
  proelium redintegrârent; equites vêro, ut turpitûdinem
  fugae virtûte dêlêrent, omnibus in locis pûgnae se legiônâriis
  mîlitibus praeferrent. At hostes etiam in extrêma                5
  spe salûtis mâximam virtûtem praestitêrunt; nam cum
  prîmi eôrum cecidissent, proximi iacentibus comitibus
  însistêbant atque ex eôrum corporibus pûgnâbant; hîs
  dêiectis et coacervâtis cadâveribus, cêteri ut ex tumulo
  têla in nostros côniciêbant et pîla intercepta remittêbant:     10
  ut iûdicâri dêbêret nôn nêquîquam tantae virtûtis homines
  ausos esse trânsîre lâtissimum flûmen, ascendere altissimas
  rîpas, subîre inîquissimum locum; quae facilia ex
  difficillimis animi mâgnitûdo redêgerat.

    +prôcumbo+, _prôcido_.
    +turpitûdo+: _îgnôminia_, _înfâmia_.
    +dêleo+, _exstinguo_.
    +extrêmus+, _ultimus_.
    +praesto+: _praebeo_, _ostento_.
    +iaceo+, _prôcumbo_.
    +coacervo+: _congero_, _côgo_.
    +cadâver+, _corpus_.
    +nêquîquam+, _frûstra_.
    +redigo+, _facio_.


_Why slay the poor remnant? Let them live._

  28. Hôc proelio facto et prope ad interneciônem gente
  âc nômine Nerviôrum redâcto, mâiôres nâtu, quôs ûna
  cum pueris mulieribusque in palûdes côniectos dîxerâmus,
  cônsênsu omnium qui supererant lêgâtos ad Caesarem
  mîsêrunt sêque ei dêdidêrunt. Postea in commemoranda             5
  cîvitâtis calamitâte, ex sexcentis ad tres senâtôres, ex
  hominum mîlibus LX vix ad quîngentos qui arma ferre
  possent, sêse redâctos esse dîxêrunt. Quôs Caesar ut in
  miseros âc supplices ûsus misericordia vidêrêtur,               10
  dîligentissime cônservâvit suîsque fînibus atque oppidis ûti
  iûssit et fînitimis imperâvit ut ab iniûria et maleficio se
  suôsque prohibêrent.

    +prope+, _paene_, 19.
    +internecio+, _interitus_.
    +redigo+, _redûco_.
    +puerî+, _lîberi_, 13.
    +cônicio+, _dêpôno_, 16.
    +dêdo+, _permitto_, 15.
    +commemoro+, _nârro_.
    +fînitimus+, _vîcînus_, 2.


_The Aduatuci prepare to make a desperate resistance._

  29. Aduâtuci, qui cum omnibus côpiis auxilio Nerviis
  veniêbant, hâc pûgna nûntiâta ex itinere domum revertêrunt;
  cûnctis oppidis castellîsque dêsertis sua omnia in
  ûnum oppidum êgregie nâtûra mûnîtum contulêrunt.
  Quod ex omnibus in circuitu partibus altissimas rûpes            5
  dêspectûsque habêbat, sed ûna ex parte lêniter adclîvis
  aditus relinquêbâtur; quem locum duplici altissimo mûro
  mûnierant; tum mâgni ponderis saxa et praeacûtas trabes
  in mûro conlocâbant. Ipsi erant ex Cimbris Teutonîsque
  prôgnâti, qui, cum iter in prôvinciam nostram atque             10
  Îtaliam facerent, custôdiam ex suis âc praesidium sex
  mîlia hominum relîquêrunt. Hi post eôrum obitum
  multos annos a fînitimis exagitâti, cônsênsu eôrum omnium
  hunc sibi domicilio locum dêlêgêrunt.

    +revertor+, _redeo_, 10.
    +cûnctus+, _omnis_.
    +êgregie+: _optime_, _eximie_, 8.
    +dêspectus+, _prôspectus_.
    +lêniter+, _paulâtim_.
    +aditus+, _accessus_, 15.
    +conloco+, _pôno_, 8.
    +prôgnâtus+, _ortus_, 4.
    +obitus+, _interitus_, 28.
    +dêligo+, _êligo_, 17.


_From their walls they taunt the Romans._

  30. Âc prîmo adventu exercitus nostri crêbras ex
  oppido excursiônes faciêbant parvulîsque proeliis cum
  nostris contendêbant; postea vâllo pedum XII in circuitu
  XV mîlium crêbrîsque castellis circummûnîti oppido sêse
  continêbant. Ubi vîneis âctis aggere exstrûcto turrim            5
  procul cônstitui vîdêrunt, prîmum inrîdêre ex mûro atque
  increpitâre vôcibus coepêrunt, quod tanta mâchinâtio ab
  tanto spatio înstruerêtur: quibusnam manibus aut quibus
  vîribus praesertim homines tantulae statûrae turrim
  tanti oneris in mûro sêse conlocâre cônfîderent?                10

    +adventus+, _accessus_, 15.
    +crêber+, _frequens_, 1.
    +excursio+, _êruptio_.
    +cônstituo+, _pôno_.
    +inrîdeo+, _dêrîdeo_.
    +increpito+, _maledîco_.
    +tantulus+, _parvulus_.
    +onus+, _pondus_.


_But soon they lose confidence and offer to surrender._

  31. Ubi vêro turrim movêri et adpropînquâre moenibus
  vîdêrunt, nova atque inûsitâta specie commôti lêgâtos
  ad Caesarem de pâce mîsêrunt, qui ad hunc modum locûti
  sunt: Aduâtuci nôn exîstimant Rômânos sine ope dîvîna
  bellum gerere, qui tantae altitûdinis mâchinâtiônes tanta        5
  celeritâte prômovêre possint; itaque se suaque omnia
  eôrum potestâti permittunt. Ûnum petunt: si fôrte
  Caesar pro sua clêmentia âc mânsuêtûdine statuerit
  Aduâtucos esse cônservandos, ne eos armis dêspoliet.
  Omnes fere fînitimi sunt inimîci âc eôrum virtûti invident,     10
  a quibus se dêfendere trâditis armis nôn poterunt. Sibi
  praestet, si in eum câsum dêdûcantur, quamvis fôrtûnam
  a populo Rômâno pati, quam ab inimîcis per cruciâtum
  interfici.

    +novus+, _mîrus_.
    +inûsitâtus+: _însolitus_, _novus_.
    +species+, _facies_.
    +modus+, _ratio_.
    +ops+, _auxilium_.
    +permitto+, _dêdo_, 15.
    +peto+, _ôro_, 13.
    +mânsuêtûdo+, _lênitas_, 14.
    +statuo+, _cônstituo_, 10.
    +fere+, _paene_, 25.
    +câsus+, _fâtum_, 22.
    +dêdûco+, _redigo_, 28.


_They must disarm, but are promised protection._

  32. Ad haec Caesar respondit: "Magis cônsuêtûdine
  mea quam merito vestro cîvitâtem cônservâbo, si prius
  quam mûrum aries attigerit, vos dêdideritis: sed dêditiônis
  nûlla est condicio nisi armis trâditis. Id quod in
  Nerviis fêci faciam fînitimîsque imperâbo ne quam iniûriam       5
  dêditîciis populi Rômâni înferant." Re nûntiâta
  ad suos, quae imperârentur facere dîxêrunt. Armôrum
  tanta multitûdo de mûro in fossam quae erat ante oppidum
  iacta est, ut prope summam mûri aggerisque altitûdinem
  acervi eôrum adaequârent, et tamen circiter pars                10
  tertia, ut postea perspectum est, cêlâta atque in oppido
  retenta est. Deinde portis patefactis eo die pâce sunt
  ûsi oppidâni.

    +prius quam+, _ante quam_.
    +dêditio+, _trâditio_, 12.
    +fînitimus+, _vîcînus_, 2.
    +înfero+: _fero_, _facio_.
    +prope+, _paene_, 28.
    +circiter+, _ad_, 19.
    +perspicio+, _intellego_.
    +patefacio+, _aperio_.


_A brave dash for freedom, but a terrible fate._

  33. Sub vesperum Caesar portas claudi mîlitêsque ex
  oppido exîre iûssit. Oppidâni cônsilio ante inito, ut
  intellêctum est, quod dêditiône facta nostros praesidia
  dêductûros aut dênique indîligentius servâtûros crêdiderant,
  tertia vigilia, qua minime arduus ad nostras mûnîtiônes          5
  ascênsus vidêbâtur, omnibus côpiis repentîno ex
  oppido êruptiônem fêcêrunt. Celeriter, ut ante Caesar
  imperârat, îgnibus sîgnificâtiône facta ex proximis castellis
  eo concursum est. Ibi pûgnâtum est âcriter ab
  hostibus in extrêma spe salûtis inîquo loco contra eos          10
  qui ex vâllo turribusque têla iacerent, cum in ûna virtûte
  omnis spes salûtis cônsisteret. Occîsis ad hominum
  mîlibus quattuor reliqui in oppidum reiecti sunt. Postrîdie
  êius diêi refrâctis portis, cum iam dêfenderet nêmo,
  atque intrômîssis mîlitibus nostris sectiônem êius oppidi       15
  ûniversam Caesar vendidit. Ab iis qui êmerant capitum
  numerus ad eum relâtus est mîlium quînquâginta trium.

    +intellego+, _perspicio_, 32.
    +dênique+, _saltem_.
    +indîligenter+, _neglegenter_.
    +arduus+, _difficilis_.
    +repentînus+, _subitus_.
    +êruptio+, _excursio_, 30.
    +sîgnificâtio+, _sîgnum_.
    +inîquus+, _incommodus_.
    +ûniversus+, _tôtus_.
    +refero+, _renûntio_.


_All the maritime nations submit to the Romans._

  34. Eôdem tempore a P. Crasso, quem cum legiône
  ûna mîserat ad Venetos, Unellos, Osismos, Curiosolitas,
  Esuvios, Aulercos, Rêdones, quae sunt maritimae cîvitâtes
  Ôceanumque attingunt, certior factus est omnes eas
  cîvitâtes in diciônem potestâtemque populi Rômâni esse           5
  redâctas.

    +attingo+, _tango_.
    +dicio+, _imperium_.
    +redigo+, _pâco_.


_Gaul lies crushed and bleeding. Rome rejoices and thanks the gods._

  35. Hîs rêbus gestis omni Gallia pâcâta, tanta hûius
  belli ad barbaros opînio perlâta est uti ab iis nâtiônibus
  quae trâns Rhênum incolerent mitterentur lêgâti ad
  Caesarem, qui se obsides datûras, imperâta factûras pollicêrentur.
  Quâs lêgâtiônes Caesar, quod in Îtaliam Illyricumque             5
  properâbat, inita proxima aestâte ad se reverti
  iûssit. Ipse in Carnûtes, Andes Turonêsque, quae cîvitâtes
  propînquae hîs locis erant ubi bellum gesserat,
  legiônibus in hîbernâcula dêductis, in Îtaliam profectus
  est. Ob eâsque res ex litteris Caesaris dies quîndecim          10
  supplicâtio dêcrêta est, quod ante id tempus accidit nûlli.

    +pâco+, _redigo_, 34.
    +opînio+, _fâma_, 8.
    +propero+, _mâtûro_, 5.
    +ineo+, _incipio_.
    +propînquus+: _vîcînus_, _fînitimus_, 2.
    +accido+, _contingo_.




C. IULI CAESARIS

DE BELLO GALLICO


_LIBER SECUNDUS._

B.C. 57; A.U.C. 697.

THE BELGIAN LEAGUE DEFEATED.


1. Cum esset Caesar in citeriore Gallia in hibernis, ita uti supra
demonstravimus, crebri ad eum rumores adferebantur, litterisque item
Labieni certior fiebat omnes Belgas, quam tertiam esse Galliae partem
dixeramus, contra populum Romanum coniurare obsidesque inter se dare.
Coniurandi has esse causas: primum quod vererentur ne omni pacata Gallia
ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur; deinde quod ab nonnullis Gallis
sollicitarentur,--partim qui, ut Germanos diutius in Gallia versari
noluerant, ita populi Romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in
Gallia moleste ferebant; partim qui mobilitate et levitate animi novis
imperiis studebant; ab nonnullis etiam, quod in Gallia a potentioribus
atque iis qui ad conducendos homines facultates habebant, vulgo regna
occupabantur, qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro consequi poterant.
[p. 23 l. 1-16]

2. His nuntiis litterisque commotus Caesar duas legiones in citeriore
Gallia novas conscripsit, et inita aestate in interiorem Galliam qui
deduceret Q. Pedium legatum misit. Ipse, cum primum pabuli copia esse
inciperet, ad exercitum venit. Dat negotium Senonibus reliquisque
Gallis, qui finitimi Belgis erant, uti ea quae apud eos gerantur
cognoscant seque de his rebus certiorem faciant. Hi constanter omnes
nuntiaverunt manus cogi, exercitum in unum locum conduci. Tum vero
dubitandum non existimavit quin ad eos proficisceretur. Re frumentaria
comparata castra movet diebusque circiter quindecim ad fines Belgarum
pervenit. [p. 23 l. 17-20, p. 24 l. 1-8]

3. Eo cum de improviso celeriusque omni opinione venisset, Remi, qui
proximi Galliae ex Belgis sunt, ad eum legatos Iccium et Andocumborium
primos civitatis miserunt qui dicerent: 'Se suaque omnia in fidem atque
in potestatem populi Romani permittere, neque se cum Belgis reliquis
consensisse neque contra populum Romanum coniurasse, paratosque esse et
obsides dare et imperata facere et oppidis recipere et frumento
ceterisque rebus iuvare; reliquos omnes Belgas in armis esse,
Germanosque qui cis Rhenum incolant sese cum his coniunxisse, tantumque
esse eorum omnium furorem ut ne Suessiones quidem, fratres
consanguineosque suos, qui eodem iure et isdem legibus utantur, unum
imperium unumque magistratum cum ipsis habeant, deterrere potuerint quin
cum his consentirent.' [p. 24 l. 9-23]

4. Cum ab his quaereret quae civitates quantaeque in armis essent et
quid in bello possent, sic reperiebat: plerosque Belgas esse ortos ab
Germanis Rhenumque antiquitus traductos propter loci fertilitatem ibi
consedisse Gallosque qui ea loca incolerent expulisse, solosque esse qui
patrum nostrorum memoria, omni Gallia vexata, Teutonos Cimbrosque intra
fines suos ingredi prohibuerint; qua ex re fieri uti earum rerum memoria
magnam sibi auctoritatem magnosque spiritus in re militari sumerent. De
numero eorum omni se habere explorata Remi dicebant, proptera quod
propinquitatibus adfinitatibusque coniuncti, quantam quisque
multitudinem in communi Belgarum concilio ad id bellum pollicitus sit
cognoverint. Plurimuni inter eos Bellovacos et virtute et auctoritate et
hominum numero valere: hos posse conficere armata milia centum,
pollicitos ex eo numero electa sexaginta, totiusque belli imperium sibi
postulare. Suessiones suos esse finitimos: latissimos feracissimosque
agros possidere. Apud eos fuisse regem nostra etiam memoria Divitiacum,
totius Galliae potentissimum, qui cum magnae partis harum regionum tum
etiam Britanniae imperium obtinuerit: nunc esse regem Galbam; ad hunc
propter iustitiam prudentiamque suam totius belli summam omnium
voluntate deferri: oppida habere numero XII, polliceri milia armata
quinquaginta; totidem Nervios, qui maxime feri inter ipsos habeantur,
longissimeque absint; quindecim milia Atrebates, Ambianos decem milia,
Moriuos XXV milia, Menapios VII milia; Caletos X milia; Velocasses et
Veromanduos totidem; Aduatucos decem et novem milia; Condrusos,
Eburones, Caeroesos, Paemanos, qui uno nomine Germani appellantur,
arbitrari ad XL milia. [p. 24 l. 24-32, p. 25 l. 1-23]

5. Caesar Remos cohortatus liberaliterque oratione prosecutus omnem
senatum ad se convenire principumque liberos obsides ad se adduci
iussit. Quae omnia ab his diligenter ad diem facta sunt. Ipse Divitiacum
Aeduum magno opere cohortatus docet quanto opere rei publicae
communisque salutis intersit man us hostium distineri, ne cum tanta
multitudine uno tempore confligendum sit. Id fieri posse, si suas copias
Aedui in fines Bellovacorum introduxeriut et eorum agros populari
coeperint. His mandatis eum ab se dimittit. Postquam omnes Belgarum
copias in unum locum coactas ad se venire vidit neque iam longe abesse
ab iis quos miserat exploratoribus et ab Remis cognovit, flumen Axonam,
quod est in extremis Remorum finibus, exercitum traducere maturavit
atque ibi castra posuit. Quae res et latus unum castrorum ripis fluminis
muniebat et post eum quae essent tuta ab hostibus reddebat, et commeatus
ab Remis reliquisque civitatibus ut sine periculo ad eum portari posset
efficiebat. In eo flumine pons erat. Ibi praesidium ponit et in altera
parte fluminis Q. Titurium Sabinum legatum cum sex cohortibus relinquit.
Castra in altitudinem pedum XII vallo fossaque duodeviginti pedum munire
iubet. [p. 25 l. 24-32, p. 26 l. 1-14]

6. Ab his castris oppidum Remorum nomine Bibrax aberat milia passuum
octo. Id ex itinere magno impetu Belgae oppugnare coeperunt. Aegre eo
die sustentatum est. Gallorum eadem atque Belgarum oppugnatio est haec.
Ubi circumiecta multitudine hominum totis moenibus undique in murum
lapides iaci coepti sunt, murusque defensoribus nudatus est, testudine
facta portas succedunt murumque subruunt. Quod tum facile fiebat. Nam
cum tanta multitudo lapides ac tela conicerent, in muro consistendi
potestas erat nulli. Cum finem oppugnandi nox fecisset, Iccius Remus,
summa nobilitate et gratia inter suos, qui tum oppido praefuerat, unus
ex iis qui legati de pace ad Caesarem venerant, nuntium ad eum mittit:
nisi subsidium sibi submittatur, sese diutius sustinere non posse.
[p. 26 l. 15-29]

7. Eo de media nocte Caesar isdem ducibus usus qui nuntii ab Iccio
venerant, Numidas et Cretas sagittarios et funditores Baleares subsidio
oppidanis mittit; quorum adventu et Remis cum spe defensionis studium
propugnandi accessit, et hostibus eadem de causa spes potiundi oppidi
discessit. Itaque paulisper apud oppidum morati agrosque Remorum
depopulati, omnibus vicis aedificiisque quos adire potuerant incensis,
ad castra Caesaris omnibus copiis contenderunt et ab milibus passuum
minus duobus castra posuerunt; quae castra, ut fumo atque ignibus
significabatur, amplius milibus passuum octo in latitudinem patebant.
[p. 26 l. 30-32, p. 27 l. 1-9]

8. Caesar primo et propter multitudinem hostium et propter eximiam
opinionem virtutis proelio supersedere statuit; cotidie tamen
equestribus proeliis quid hostis virtute posset et quid nostri auderent
periclitabatur. Ubi nostros non esse inferiores intellexit, loco pro
castris ad aciem instruendam natura opportuno atque idoneo--quod is
collis, ubi castra posita erant, paululum ex planitie editus tantum
adversus in latitudinem patebat quantum loci acies instructa occupare
poterat, atque ex utraque parte lateris deiectus habebat et in frontem
leniter fastigatus paulatim ad planitiem redibat--ab utroque latere eius
collis transversam fossam obduxit circiter passuum quadringentorum et ad
extremas fossas castella constituit ibique tormenta conlocavit, ne, cum
aciem instruxisset, hostes, quod tantum multitudine poterant, ab
lateribus pugnantes suos circumvenire possent. Hoc facto duabus
legionibus quas proxime conscripserat in castris relictis, ut, si quo
opus esset, subsidio duci possent, reliquas sex legiones pro castris in
acie constituit. Hostes item suas copias ex castris eductas
instruxerant. [p. 27 l. 10-30]

9. Palus erat non magna inter nostrum atque hostium exercitum. Hanc si
nostri transirent hostes exspectabant; nostri autem, si ab illis initium
transeundi fieret, ut impeditos adgrederentur, parati in armis erant.
Interim proelio equestri inter duas acies contendebatur. Ubi neutri
transeundi initium faciunt, secundiore equitum proelio nostris Caesar
suos in castra reduxit. Hostes protinus ex eo loco ad flumen Axonam
contenderunt, quod esse post nostra castra demonstratum est. Ibi vadis
repertis partem suarum copiarum traducere conati sunt eo consilio, ut,
si possent, castellum cui praeerat Q. Titurius legatus expugnarent
pontemque interscinderent; si minus potuissent, agros Remorum
popularentur, qui magno nobis usui ad bellum gerendum erant, commeatuque
nostros prohiberent. [p. 27 l. 31-32, p. 28 l. 1-13]

10. Caesar certior factus ab Titurio omnem equitatum et levis armaturae
Numidas, funditores sagittariosque pontem traducit atque ad eos
contendit. Acriter in eo loco pugnatum est. Hostes impeditos nostri in
flumine adgressi magnum eorum numerum occiderunt: per eorum corpora
reliquos audacissime transire conantes multitudine telorum reppulerunt;
primos qui transierant equitatu circumventos interfecerunt. Hostes, ubi
et de expugnando oppido et de flumine transeundo spem se fefellisse
intellexerunt neque nostros in locum iniquiorem progredi pugnandi causa
viderunt, atque ipsos res frumentaria deficere coepit, concilio
convocato constituerunt optimum esse domum suam quemque reverti, et,
quorum in fines primum Romani exercitum introduxissent, ad eos
defendendos undique convenirent, ut potius in suis quam in alienis
finibus decertarent et domesticis copiis rei frumentariae uterentur. Ad
eam sententiam cum reliquis causis haec quoque ratio eos deduxit, quod
Divitiacum atque Aeduos finibus Bellovacorum adpropinquare cognoverant.
His persuaderi ut diutis morarentur neque suis auxilium ferrent non
poterat. [p. 28 l. 14-32, p. 29 l. 1-2]

11. Ea re constituta, secunda vigilia magno cum strepitu ac tumultu
castris egressi, nullo certo ordine neque imperio, cum sibi quisque
primum itineris locum peteret et domum pervenire properaret, fecerunt
ut consimilis fugae profectio videretur. Hac re statim Caesar per
speculatores cognita insidias veritus, quod qua de causa discederent
nondum perspexerat, exercitum equitatumque castris continuit. Prima luce
confirmata re ab exploratoribus omnem equitatum qui novissimum agmen
moraretur praemisit. His Q. Pedium et L. Aurunculeium Cottam legatos
praefecit; T. Labienum legatum cum legionibus tribus subsequi iussit. Hi
novissimos adorti et multa milia passuum prosecuti magnam multitudinem
eorum fugientium conciderunt, cum ab extremo agmine ad quos ventum erat
consisterent fortiterque impetum nostrorum militum sustinerent; priores,
quod abesse a periculo viderentur neque ulla necessitate neque imperio
continerentur, exaudito clamore perturbatis ordinibus omnes in fuga sibi
praesidium ponerent. Ita sine ullo periculo tantam eorum multitudinem
nostri interfecerunt quantum fuit diei spatium, sub occasumque solis
destiterunt, seque in castra, ut erat imperatum, receperunt. [p. 29
l. 3-25]

12. Postridie eius diei Caesar, priusquam se hostes ex terrore ac fuga
reciperent, in fines Suessionum, qui proximi Remis erant, exercitum
duxit et magno itinere confecto ad oppidum Noviodunum contendit. Id ex
itinere oppugnare conatus, quod vacuum ab defensoribus esse audiebat,
propter latitudinem fossae murique altitudinem paucis defendentibus
expugnare non potuit. Castris munitis vineas agere quaeque ad
oppugnandum usui erant comparare coepit. Interim omnis ex fuga
Suessionum multitudo in oppidum proxima nocte convenit. Celeriter vineis
ad oppidum actis, aggere iacto turribusque constitutis, magnitudine
operum, quae neque viderant ante Galli neque audierant, et celeritate
Romanorum permoti, legatos ad Caesarem de deditione mittunt et
petentibus Remis ut conservarentur impetrant. [p. 29 l. 26-32, p. 30
l. 1-8]

13. Caesar obsidibus acceptis primis civitatis atque ipsius Galbae regis
duobus filiis, armisque omnibus ex oppido traditis, in deditionem
Suessiones accepit exercitumque in Bellovacos ducit. Qui cum se suaque
omnia in oppidum Bratuspantium contulissent, atque ab eo oppido Caesar
cum exercitu circiter milia passuum quinque abesset, omnes maiores natu
ex oppido egressi manus ad Caesarem tendere et voce significare
coeperunt sese in eius fidem ac potestatem venire neque contra populum
Romanum armis contendere. Item, cum ad oppidum accessisset castraque ibi
poneret, pueri mulieresque ex muro passis manibus suo more pacem ab
Romanis petierunt. [p. 30 l. 9-20]

14. Pro his Divitiacus--nam post discessum Belgarum dimissis Aeduorum
copiis ad eum reverterat--facit verba: Bellovacos omni tempore in fide
atque amicitia civitatis Aeduae fuisse: impulsos a suis principibus,
qui dicerent Aeduos ab Caesare in servitutem redactos omnes indignitates
contumeliasque perferre, et ab Aeduis defecisse et populo Romano bellum
intulisse. Qui eius consili principes fuissent, quod intellegerent
quantam calamitatem civitati intulissent, in Britanniam profugisse.
Petere non solum Bellovacos sed etiam pro his Aeduos ut sua clementia ac
mansuetudine in eos utatur. Quod si fecerit, Aeduorum auctoritatem apud
omnes Belgas amplificaturum, quorum auxiliis atque opibus, si qua bella
inciderint, sustentare consuerint. [p. 30 l. 21-32, p. 31 l. 1-2]

15. Caesar honoris Divitiaci atque Aeduorum causa sese eos in fidem
recepturum et conservaturum dixit; quod erat civitas magna inter Belgas
auctoritate atque hominum multitudine praestabat, sexcentos obsides
poposcit. His traditis omnibusque armis ex oppido conlatis, ab eo loco
in fines Ambianorum pervenit, qui se suaque omnia sine mora dediderunt.
Eorum fines Nervii attingebant; quorum de natura moribusque Caesar cum
quaereret, sic reperiebat: Nullum aditum esse ad eos mercatoribus; nihil
pati vini reliquarumque rerum inferri, quod iis rebus relanguescere
animos eorum et remitti virtutem existimarent: esse homines feros
magnaeque virtutis; increpitare atque incusare reliquos Belgas qui se
populo Romano dedidissent patriamque virtutem proiecissent; confirmare
sese neque legatos missuros neque ullam condicionem pacis accepturos.
[p. 31 l. 3-18]

16. Cum per eorum fines triduum iter fecisset, inveniebat ex captivis
Sabim flumen ab castris suis non amplius milia passuum X abesse: trans
id flumen omnes Nervios consedisse adventumque ibi Romanorum exspectare
una cum Atrebatis et Veromanduis finitimis suis, nam his utrisque
persuaserant uti eandem belli fortunam experirentur; exspectari etiam ab
his Aduatucorum copias atque esse in itinere; mulieres quique per
aetatem ad pugnam inutiles viderentur in eum locum coniecisse, quo
propter paludes exercitui aditus non esset. [p. 31 l. 19-28]

17. His rebus cognitis exploratores centurionesque praemittit qui locum
idoneum castris deligant. Cum ex dediticiis Belgis reliquisque Gallis
complures Caesarem secuti una iter facerent, quidam ex his, ut postea ex
captivis cognitum est, eorum dierum consuetudine itineris nostri
exercitus perspecta, nocte ad Nervios pervenerunt atque his
demonstrarunt inter singulas legiones impedimentorum magnum numerum
intercedere, neque esse quicquam negoti, cum prima legio in castra
venisset, reliquaeque legiones magnum spatium abessent, hanc sub
sarcinis adoriri; qua pulsa impedimentisque direptis futurum ut reliquae
contra consistere non auderent. Adiuvabat etiam eorum consilium qui rem
deferebant, quod Nervii antiquitus, cum equitatu nihil possent (neque
enim ad hoc tempus ei rei student, sed quicquid possunt, pedestribus
valent copiis) quo facilius finitimorum equitatum, si praedandi causa ad
eos venissent, impedirent, teneris arboribus incisis atque inflexis,
crebrisque in latitudinem ramis enatis, et rubis sentibusque
interiectis, effecerant ut instar muri hae saepes munimenta praeberent,
quo non modo non intrari sed ne perspici quidem posset. His rebus cum
iter agminis nostri impediretur, non omittendum sibi consilium Nervii
existimaverunt. [p. 31 l. 29-32, p. 32 l. 1-20]

18. Loci natura erat haec, quem locum nostri castris delegerant. Collis
ab summo aequaliter declivis ad flumen Sabim, quod supra nominavimus,
vergebat. Ab eo flumine pari adclivitate collis nascebatur adversus huic
et contrarius, passus circiter ducentos infimus apertus, ab superiore
parte silvestris ut non facile introrsus perspici posset. Intra eas
silvas hostes in occulto sese continebant; in aperto loco secundum
flumen paucae stationes equitum videbantur. Fluminis erat altitudo pedum
circiter trium. [p. 32 l. 21-30]

19. Caesar equitatu praemisso subsequebatur omnibus copiis; sed ratio
ordoque agminis aliter se habebat ac Belgae ad Nervios detulerant. Nam
quod ad hostes adpropinquabat, consuetudine sua Caesar sex legiones
expeditas ducebat; post eas totius exercitus impedimenta conlocarat;
inde duae legiones quae proxime conscriptae erant totum agmen claudebant
praesidioque impedimentis erant. Equites nostri, cum funditoribus
sagittariisque flumen transgressi, cum hostium equitatu proelium
commiserunt. Cum se illi identidem in silvas ad suos reciperent ac
rursus ex silva in nostros impetum facerent, neque nostri longius quam
quem ad finem porrecta loca aperta pertinebant cedentes insequi
auderent, interim legiones sex, quae primae venerant, opere dimenso
castra munire coeperunt. Ubi prima impedimenta nostri exercitus ab iis
qui in silvis abditi latebant visa sunt, quod tempus inter eos
committendi proeli convenerat, ut intra silvas aciem ordinesque
constituerant atque ipsi sese confirmaverant, subito omnibus copiis
provolaverunt impetumque in nostros equites fecerunt. His facile pulsis
ac proturbatis, incredibili celeritate ad flumen decucurrerunt, ut paene
uno tempore et ad silvas et in flumine et iam in manibus nostris hostes
viderentur. Eadem autem celeritate adverso colle ad nostra castra atque
eos qui in opere occupati erant contenderunt. [p. 32 l. 31-32, p. 33
l. 1-23]

20. Caesari omnia uno tempore erant agenda: vexillum proponendum, quod
erat insigne cum ad arma concurri oporteret, signum tuba dandum, ab
opere revocandi milites, qui paulo longius aggeris petendi causa
processerant arcessendi, acies instruenda, milites cohortandi,
signum dandum. Quarum rerum magnam partem temporis brevitas et
successus hostium impediebat. His difficultatibus duae res erant
subsidio--scientia atque usus militum, quod superioribus proeliis
exercitati, quid fieri oporteret non minus commode ipsi sibi
praescribere quam ab aliis doceri poterant; et quod ab opere singulisque
legionibus singulos legatos Caesar discedere nisi munitis castris
vetuerat. Hi propter propinquitatem et celeritatem hostium nihil iam
Caesaris imperium exspectabant, sed per se quae videbantur
administrabant. [p. 33 l. 24-32, p. 34 l. 1-6]

21. Caesar necessariis rebus imperatis ad cohortandos milites quam in
partem fors obtulit decucurrit et ad legionem decimam devenit. Milites
non longiore oratione cohortatus quam uti suae pristinae virtutis
memoriam retinerent neu perturbarentur animo hostiumque impetum fortiter
sustinerent, quod non longius hostes aberant quam quo telum adici
posset, proeli committendi signum dedit. Atque in alteram partem item
cohortandi causa profectus pugnantibus occurrit. Temporis tanta fuit
exiguitas hostiumque tam paratus ad dimicandum animus, ut non modo ad
insignia adcommodanda, sed etiam ad galeas induendas scutisque tegimenta
detrudenda tempus defuerit. Quam quisque ab opere in partem casu devenit
quaeque prima signa conspexit, ad haec constitit, ne in quaerendis suis
pugnandi tempus dimitteret. [p. 34 l. 7-22]

22. Instructo exercitu magis ut loci natura deiectusque collis et
necessitas temporis quam ut rei militaris ratio atque ordo postulabat,
cum diversis legionibus aliae alia in parte hostibus resisterent,
saepibusque densissimis, ut ante demonstravimus, interiectis prospectus
impediretur, neque certa subsidia conlocari, neque quid in quaque parte
opus esset provideri, neque ab uno omnia imperia administrari poterant.
Itaque in tanta rerum iniquitate, fortunae quoque eventus varii
sequebantur. [p. 34 l. 23-31]

23. Legionis nonae et decimae milites, ut in sinistra parte acie
constiterant, pilis emissis, cursu ac lassitudine exanimatos
vulneribusque confectos Atrebates--nam his ea pars obvenerat--celeriter
ex loco superiore in flumen compulerunt et transire conantes insecuti
gladiis magnam partem eorum impeditam interfecerunt. Ipsi transire
flumen non dubitaverunt, et in locum iniquum progressi, rursus
resistentes hostes redintegrato proelio in fugam coniecerunt. Item alia
in parte diversae duae legiones, undecima et octava, profligatis
Veromanduis, quibuscum erant congressi, ex loco superiore in ipsis
fluminis ripis proeliabantur. At totis fere a fronte et ab sinistra
parte nudatis castris, cum in dextro cornu legio duodecima et non magno
ab ea intervallo septima constitisset, omnes Nervii confertissimo agmine
duce Boduognato qui summam imperi tenebat, ad eum locum contenderunt;
quorum pars aperto latere legiones circumvenire, pars summum castrorum
locum petere coepit. [p. 35 l. 1-18]

24. Eodem tempore equites nostri levisque armaturae pedites, qui cum iis
una fuerant, quos primo hostium impetu pulsos dixeram, cum se in castra
reciperent, adversis hostibus occurrebant ac rursus aliam in partem
fugam petebant; et calones, qui ab decumana porta ac summo iugo collis
nostros victores flumen transisse conspexerant, praedandi causa egressi,
cum respexissent et hostes in nostris castris versari vidissent,
praecipites fugae sese mandabant. Simul eorum qui cum impedimentis
veniebant clamor fremitusque oriebatur, aliique aliam in partem
perterriti ferebantur. Quibus omnibus rebus permoti equites Treveri,
quorum inter Gallos virtutis opinio est singularis, qui auxili causa ab
civitate ad Caesarem missi venerant, cum multitudine hostium castra
compleri, legiones premi et paene circumventas teneri, calones, equites,
funditores, Numidas, diversos dissipatosque in omnes partes fugere
vidissent, desperatis nostris rebus domum contenderunt; Romanos pulsos
superatosque, castris impedimentisque eorum hostes potitos civitati
renuntiaverunt. [p. 35 l. 19-32, p. 36 l. 1-6]

25. Caesar ab decimae legionis cohortatione ad dextrum cornu profectus,
ubi suos urgeri signisque in unum locum conlatis duodecimae legionis
confertos milites sibi ipsos ad pugnam esse impedimento vidit--quartae
cohortis omnibus centurionibus occisis signiferoque interfecto, signo
amisso, reliquarum cohortium omnibus fere centurionibus aut vulneratis
aut occisis, in his primipilo P. Sextio Baculo, fortissimo viro, multis
gravibusque vulneribus confecto ut iam se sustinere non posset, reliquos
esse tardiores, et nonnullos ab novissimis deserto proelio excedere ac
tela vitare, hostes neque a fronte ex inferiore loco subeuntes
intermittere et ab utroque latere instare, et rem esse in angusto vidit,
neque ullum esse subsidium quod submitti posset--scuto ab novissimis uni
militi detracto, quod ipse eo sine scuto venerat, in primam aciem
processit centurionibusque nominatim appellatis reliquos cohortatus
milites signa inferre et manipulos laxare iussit, quo facilius gladiis
uti possent. Cuius adventu spe inlata militibus ac redintegrato animo,
cum pro se quisque in conspectu imperatoris etiam in extremis suis rebus
operam navare cuperet, paulum hostium impetus tardatus est. [p. 36
l. 7-28]

26. Caesar cum septimam legionem, quae iuxta constiterat, item urgeri ab
hoste vidisset, tribunes militum monuit ut paulatim sese legiones
coniungerent et conversa signa in hostes inferrent. Quo facto, cum alius
alii subsidium ferret, neque timerent ne aversi ab hoste
circumvenirentur, audacius resistere ac fortius pugnare coeperunt.
Interim milites legionum duarum, quae in novissimo agmine praesidio
impedimentis fuerant, proelio nuntiato cursu incitato in summo colle ab
hostibus conspiciebantur; et T. Labienus castris hostium potitus et ex
loco superiore quae res in nostris castris gererentur conspicatus
decimam legionem subsidio nostris misit. Qui cum ex equitum et calonum
fuga, quo in loco res esset, quantoque in periculo et castra et legiones
et imperator versaretur, cognovissent, nihil ad celeritatem sibi reliqui
fecerunt. [p. 36 l. 29-32, p. 37 l. 1-12]

27. Horum adventu tanta rerum commutatio est facta ut nostri, etiam qui
vulneribus confecti procubuissent, scutis innixi proelium
redintegrarent; tum calones perterritos hostes conspicati etiam inermes
armatis occurrerent; equites vero, ut turpitudinem fugae virtute
delerent, omnibus in locis pugnae se legionariis militibus praeferrent.
At hostes etiam in extrema spe salutis tantam virtutem praestiterunt ut,
cum primi eorum cecidissent, proximi iacentibus insisterent atque ex
eorum corporibus pugnarent; his deiectis et coacervatis cadaveribus, qui
superessent ut ex tumulo tela in nostros conicerent et pila intercepta
remitterent: ut non nequiquam tantae virtutis homines indicari deberet
ausos esse transire latissimum flumen, ascendere altissimas ripas,
subire iniquissimum locum; quae facilia ex difficillimis animi magnitudo
redegerat. [p. 37 l. 13-28]

28. Hoc proelio facto et prope ad internecionem gente ac nomine
Nerviorum redacto maiores natu, quos una cum pueris mulieribusque in
aestuaria ac paludes coniectos dixeramus, hac pugna nuntiata, cum
victoribus nihil impeditum, victis nihil tutum arbitrarentur, omnium qui
supererant consensu legatos ad Caesarem miserunt seque ei dediderunt; et
in commemoranda civitatis calamitate ex sexcentis ad tres senatores, ex
hominum milibus LX vix ad quingentos qui arma ferre possent sese
redactos esse dixerunt. Quos Caesar, ut in miseros ac supplices usus
misericordia videretur, diligentissime conservavit suisque finibus atque
oppidis uti iussit, et finitimis imperavit ut ab iniuria et maleficio se
suosque prohiberent. [p. 37 l. 29-32, p. 38 l. 1-9]

29. Aduatuci, de quibus supra scripsimus, cum omnibus copiis auxilio
Nerviis venirent, hac pugna nuntiata ex itinere domum reverterunt;
cunctis oppidis castellisque desertis sua omnia in unum oppidum egregie
natura munitum contulerunt. Quod cum ex omnibus in circuitu partibus
altissimas rapes despectusque haberet, una ex parte leniter adclivis
aditus in latitudinem non amplius ducentorum pedum relinquebatur; quem
locum duplici altissimo muro munierant, tum magni ponderis saxa et
praeacutas trabes in muro conlocabant. Ipsi erant ex Cimbris Teutonisque
prognati, qui, cum iter in provinciam nostram atque Italiam facerent,
iis impedimentis, quae secum agere ac portare non poterant, citra flumen
Rhenum depositis custodiam ex suis ac praesidium sex milia hominum una
reliquerunt. Hi post eorum obitum multos annos a finitimis exagitati,
cum alias bellum inferrent, alias inlatum defenderent, consensu eorum
omnium pace facta hunc sibi domicilio locum delegerunt. [p. 38 l. 10-27]

30. Ac primo adventu exercitus nostri crebras ex oppido excursiones
faciebant parvulisque proeliis cum nostris contendebant; postea vallo
pedum XII in circuitu XV milium crebrisque castellis circummuniti oppido
sese continebant. Ubi vineis actis aggere exstructo turrim procul
constitui viderunt, primum inridere ex muro atque increpitare vocibus,
quod tanta machinatio ab tanto spatio instrueretur: quibusnam manibus
aut quibus viribus praesertim homines tantulae staturae--nam plerumque
hominibus Gallis prae magnitudine corporum suorum brevitas nostra
contemptui est--tanti oneris turrim in muro sese conlocare confiderent?
[p. 38 l. 28-32, p. 39 l. 1-7]

31. Ubi vero moveri et adpropinquare moenibus viderunt, nova atque
inusitata specie commoti legates ad Caesarem de pace miserunt, qui ad
hunc modum locuti: 'Non existimare Romanos sine ope divina bellum
gerere, qui tantae altitudinis machinationes tanta celeritate promovere
possent; se suaque omnia eorum potestati permittere' dixerunt. 'Unum
petere ac deprecari: si forte pro sua clementia ac mansuetudine, quam
ipsi ab aliis audirent, statuisset Aduatucos esse conservandos, ne se
armis despoliaret. Sibi omnes fere finitimos esse inimicos ac suae
virtuti invidere; a quibus se defendere traditis armis non possent. Sibi
praestare, si in eum casum deducerentur, quamvis fortunam a populo
Romano pati, quam ab his per cruciatum interfici, inter quos dominari
consuessent.' [p. 39 l. 8-22]

32. Ad haec Caesar respondit: 'Se magis consuetudine sua quam merito
eorum civitatem conservaturum, si prius quam murum aries attigisset se
dedidissent; sed deditionis nullam esse condicionem nisi armis traditis.
Se id quod in Nerviis fecisset facturum finitimisque imperaturum, ne
quam dediticiis populi Romani iniuriam inferrent.' Re nuntiata ad suos,
quae imperarentur facere dixerunt. Armorum magna multitudine de muro in
fossam quae erat ante oppidum iacta sic ut prope summam muri aggerisque
altitudinem acervi armorum adaequarent, et tamen circiter parte tertia,
ut postea perspectum est, celata atque in oppido retenta, portis
patefactis eo die pace sunt usi. [p. 39 l. 23-32, p. 40 l. 1-3]

33. Sub vesperum Caesar portas claudi militesque ex oppido exire iussit,
ne quam noctu oppidani ab militibus iniuriam acciperent. Illi ante
inito, ut intellectum est, consilio, quod deditione facta nostros
praesidia deducturos aut denique indiligentius servaturos
crediderant--partim cum iis quae retinuerant et celaverant armis,
partim scutis ex cortice factis aut viminibus intextis, quae subito, ut
temporis exiguitas postulabat, pellibus induxerant--tertia vigilia, qua
minime arduus ad nostras munitiones ascensus videbatur, omnibus copiis
repentino ex oppido eruptionem fecerunt. Celeriter, ut ante Caesar
imperarat, ignibus significatione facta ex proximis castellis eo
concursum est, pugnatumque ab hostibus ita acriter est ut a viris
fortibus in extrema spe salutis iniquo loco contra eos qui ex vallo
turribusque tela iacerent pugnari debuit, cum in una virtute omnis spes
salutis consisteret. Occisis ad hominum milibus quattuor reliqui in
oppidum reiecti sunt. Postridie eius diei refractis portis, cum iam
defenderet nemo, atque intromissis militibus nostris sectionem eius
oppidi universam Caesar vendidit. Ab iis qui emerant capitum numerus ad
eum relatus est milium quinquaginta trium. [p. 40 l. 4-25]

34. Eodem tempore a P. Crasso, quem cum legione una miserat ad Venetos,
Unellos, Osismos, Curiosolitas, Esuvios, Aulercos, Redones, quae sunt
maritimae civitates Oceanumque attingunt, certior factus est omnes eas
civitates in dicionem potestatemque populi Romani esse redactas. [p. 40
l. 26-31]

35. His rebus gestis omni Gallia pacata, tanta huius belli ad barbaros
opinio perlata est uti ab iis nationibus, quae trans Rhenum incolerent
mitterentur legati ad Caesarem, qui se obsides daturas, imperata
facturas pollicerentur. Quas legationes Caesar, quod in Italiam
Illyricumque properabat, inita proxima aestate ad se reverti iussit.
Ipse in Carnutes, Andes Turonesque, quae civitates propinquae his locis
erant ubi bellum gesserat, legionibus in hibernacula deductis, in
Italiam profectus est. Ob easque res ex litteris Caesaris dies quindecim
supplicatio decreta est, quod ante id tempus accidit nulli. [p. 41
l. 1-11]




NOTES.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.--To translate Latin into English is to express the
meaning of the Latin in English words and in English idiom. But the
meaning must be discovered before it can be expressed. Discovering the
sense is, therefore, a process preparatory to translation, but yet
measurably distinct from it. For discovering the meaning, the golden
rule is, _Take words and clauses in the order in which they stand_. If
the first chapter of this book were rendered into English words exactly
in the Latin order, the thought would be readily apprehended by any one
quite unacquainted with Latin. Such a word for word rendering, mental or
oral, is for the beginner a necessary preliminary to translation, but,
I repeat, must not be confounded with translation. For that, the golden
rule is, _Express the thought in pure English, without admixture of
Latin idiom_.


Notes under the heading CHAP. refer to the simplified text; those that
follow, under the heading PAGE, supplement the former and refer to the
unchanged text. The grammatical references are to the Latin Grammars of
Allen & Greenough and Harkness.

[Transcriber's Note:

In the printed text, the word "line" recurs at the beginning of each
page. For this e-text, it is repeated at the beginning of each chapter
instead. Page references are included for completeness.]


CHAP. 1,

line 2. +certior fîêbat+: _he was made more certain_ = _he was
informed_.

+fîêbat+: the passive of +facio+. Review the forms. 142; H. 294.

4. +Coniûrandi+: pronounce the _i_ of the second syllable like _y_.

5. +verêbantur+: the subject is +Belgae+, understood; supply the same
subject for +sollicitâbantur+.

+ad se+: refers to the subject of +verêbantur+.

6. +Germânos+: subject-accusative of +versâri+; _that the Germans should
remain_.

8. +exercitum+: subject-accusative of +hiemâre+ and +inveterâscere+.

+inveterâscere+: _get a foothold_; but what is its primary meaning from
its derivation?

10. +imperiis+: 227 e, 3; H. 385.

11. +iis+: supply mentally +ab+ before it.

13. +qui+: _and these_, referring to +potentiôres+, etc.

+eam rem+: read again the preceding sentence, and you will see to what
+eam rem+ refers.

+imperio nostro+: _under our_ (i.e. Roman) _rule_. The ablative implies
condition, and the meaning is, _if we should get the sovereignty_. 255,
d, 4; H. 431, 2, (3).

PAGE 23,

1. +ita uti+: _as_.

3. +Labiêni+: Cæsar's lieutenant was now in the country of the Sequani.
See a map of +Gallia+.

4. +quam+: _whose country_. We might expect +quos+ referring to
+Belgas+, but the relative is made to agree with the predicate noun
+partem+.

6. +has esse causas+: depending on +rûmôres adferêbantur+, like +Belgas
... coniûrâre+ and +obsides ... dare+. 272; H.

7. +omni ... Gallia+: all except their country.

+pâcâta+: the Romans, with cruel humor, called a country "pacified" when
they had enslaved it.

8. +partim qui+: _some of whom_.

9. +ut ... ita+: _as ... so_.

11. +partim qui+: _others of whom_.

12. +ab nônnûllis etiam+: these, then, are the third class by whom it is
said, +Belgae sollicitâbantur+: first, the conservative and patriotic;
second, the restless and dissatisfied; third, the selfish and ambitious.


CHAP. 2,

line 2. +interiôrem Galliam+: _the interior of Gaul_; that is, Gaul
beyond the Alps. Refer constantly to a map.

3. +qui ... dêdûceret+: +qui+ refers to +Q. Pedium+, and the clause +qui
... dêdûceret+ denotes purpose, _to lead_.

4. +Ipse+: supply +Caesar+.

6. +Ea+ = +eas res+, as shown by +rêbus+ following.

8. +manus côgi+: _that parties of men were gathering_. The construction
is the same as +Belgas ... coniûrâre+, in chap. 1.

9. +condûci+: _was mustering_; a very different meaning in chap. 1.

+quîn ... proficîscerêtur+: _to march_. What literally?

PAGE 23,

18. +inita aestâte+: _when summer had begun_ = _at the beginning of
summer_; marks the time of +dêdûceret+, not of +mîsit+.

PAGE 24,

1. +Dat negôtium+: _he charges_. What literally?

2. +uti+ (same as +ut+) ... +côgnôscant+: _to find out_; the clause
depends on +dat negôtium+.

3. +se+: refers to Caesar.

+certiôrem faciant+: compare the passive form in chap. 1.

5. +dubitandum+: in full the sentence would be, +Caesar dubitandum esse
sibi nôn exîstimâvit+; and the word for word rendering, _Cæsar did not
think an-obligation-of-hesitating to be to himself_. Translate, _he
ought to hesitate_.


CHAP. 3,

line 1. +Eo+: that is, +ad fînes Belgârum+. See the end of chap. 2.

3. +se ... permittere+: here +se+ is the subject-accusative of
+permittere+.

+in fidem+: _to the protection_.

6. +Caesaris imperâta facere+: _to do what Cæsar required_. Literally
what?

7. +oppidis recipere+: in meaning = +in oppida recipere+.

+cêteris+: not _other_, but _all other_. Their submission is abject.

9. +sêse+: not different from +se+.

10. +Suessiônes+: the object of +dêterrêre+.

12. +iûre+: _constitution_.

+îsdem+: oftener written +iîsdem+, 101, c.

PAGE 24,

9. +omni opîniône+: _than any one could expect_. 247, b; H. 417.

10. +ex Belgis+ = +Belgârum+, or +inter Belgas+.

12. +qui dîcerent+: compare +qui dêdûceret+, p. 23, l. 19, and note on
simplified text.

+se+: the object (with +sua omnia+ = _their all_) of +permittere+.
Another +se+ must be mentally supplied as the subject of +permittere+.

18. +incolant+: why not +incolunt+, for it must be translated as if it
were +incolunt+? Because the clause +qui ... incolant+ depends on the
clause +Germânos ... coniûnxisse+. It is therefore _a dependent clause
of indirect discourse_, and as such must have the subjunctive.
Thoroughly master this, the most important principle of Latin syntax.
Mark how the descriptive clause, +qui ... incolant+, _is framed into_
the main clause.

+line+ 19. +furôrem+: the politic or cowardly Remi considered the love
of liberty and independence of their brother Belgæ _blind passion_.

20. +qui ... ûtantur+: _though they ... enjoyed._ +qui+, then, must
sometimes be rendered _though he, though they_, etc., but only when the
subjunctive follows.

21. +ûtantur+: supply immediately following +atque+.

22. +ipsis+: refers to +Rêmi+.

23. +quîn ... cônsentîrent+: _from ... uniting._ Compare +quîn ...
proficîscerêtur+, p. 24, l. 6, and note on simplified text.


CHAP. 4,

line 1. +quantae+: refers to extent of country and population.

+in armis essent+: connect with +quae cîvitâtes+: _what states were in
arms, and how powerful they were_.

2. +quid in bello possent+: a literal translation, _what they could_
(do) _in war_, does not convey the meaning. Render, _what force they
could bring into the field_.

4. +ibi+: +cis Rhênum+.

6. +ex re+: equivalent to +ex causa+.

7. +fîêbat+: _it was coming about._ The Remi said, in direct discourse,
+fit+; and below, +sûmant+.

+spîritus+: means in the singular _air_, and is here used just as we use
"airs," in the phrase "to put on airs."

8. +omnia ... explôrâta+: _full information_.

9. +Quantam quisque+: notice the order. +Quisque+ likes to stand after
+quantus+, +quotus+, +se+, and +suus+; here it means _each nation_.

11. +Plûrimum ... valêbant+: about equivalent to +plûrimum poterant+,
_had the most power_.

18. +cum ... tum+: _not only ... but also_.

19. +Britanniae+: "the first mention of Britain by a Roman author."

PAGE 24,

27. +propter fertilitâtem+: to be connected with +cônsêdisse+.

28. +incolerent+: why not +incolêbant+? See note on p. 24, l. 18, +qui
... incolant+.

29. +memoria+: _within the memory_; but two lines below, _because of the
memory_.

PAGE 25,

10. +nostra etiam memoria+: compare +patrum nostrôrum memoria+, p. 24,
l. 29.

13. +obtinuerit+: _held_, not _obtained_, which is usually expressed by
+adsecûtus est+, +cônsecûtus est+, or +adeptus est+.

15. +omnium voluntâte+: _with the assent of all_.

23. +arbitrâri+: that is, +Rêmos arbitrâri+.


CHAP. 5,

line 2. +obsides+: _as hostages_, in apposition with +lîberos+. What
would have been the fate of these, if the chieftains had broken their
pledges?

4. +Rêi pûblicae interest+: _it concerns the_ (Roman) _republic_. The
real subject of +interest+, represented in English by _it_, is +manus
hostium distinêri+.

+manus+: the subject-accusative of +distinêri+, _to be kept from
uniting_.

6. +ne ... cônflîgendum sit+: _that it may not be necessary to fight_.

7. +intrôdûxerint+: the Roman way of speaking is: this can be done, if
that _shall be done, or shall have been done_; hence the future perfect.
But mark that such a future or future perfect is often best rendered by
a present.

9. +coâctas ... venîre+: _having been assembled ... to be coming_ = _had
assembled ... and were coming_.

10. +vîdit+ = +intellêxit+.

+neque iam+ = +et iam nôn+.

+iis+: take with +explôrâtôribus+.

13. +quae res+: that is, his crossing the river and fixing his camp
there.

14. +post eum quae essent+ = +ea quae post eum essent+, _his rear_. What
should you expect in place of +eum+?

+tûta+: goes with the whole expression, +post eum quae essent+.

16. +portâri+: _to be brought down the river to him_.

19. +in altitûdinem+: _to the height_.

20. +duodêvîginti pedum+: that is, +in lâtitûdinem+, _in width_.

PAGE 25,

24. +lîberâliterque ôrâtiône prôsecûtus+: lîberâliter means _in a
generous or kindly manner_; +ôrâtiône+ indicates in what sense
+prôsecûtus+ is to be taken, _accompanying with words_; finally,
+prôsequor+ has its common meaning of _accompany_, but with the meaning
unusually applied: Cæsar had encouraged the Remi, and he _accompanies
the encouragement with kind words_. Translate, _Cæsar encouraging the
Remi and adding kind words_.

29. +commûnis salûtis+: by the _common interests_ Cæsar means those of
the Ædui and the Romans.

30. +cônflîgendum sit+: compare +dubitandum (esse)+ p. 24, l. 5, and
read the note. Here, as there, +sibi+, referring to Cæsar and the Ædui,
must be mentally supplied, showing for whom the duty or necessity of
action (hesitating, fighting) exists.

31. +Id fieri posse+: depends upon +docet+. To what does +id+ refer?

PAGE 26,

1. +Postquam ... vîdit ... côgnôvit, ... mâtûrâvit+: _when he saw ...
and found out_, (then) ... _he hastened_.

3. +neque ... côgnôvit+: _and from those scouts_, etc., _found out that
they_ (the Belgæ) _were now not far distant_.

8. +et+ connects +reddêbat+ and +efficiêbat+, which have the same
subject, +quae res+. The order makes this sentence difficult. Cæsar
might have written: +et efficiêbat ut commeâtus ab Rêmis reliquîsque
cîvitâtibus sine perîculo ad eum portâri posset+. The order is so
perplexed and perplexing because Cæsar wrote in haste, and because he
began with the word which was uppermost in his mind, +commeâtus+.


CHAP. 6,

line 2. +ex itinere+: _immediately after their march_.

3. +sustentâtum est+: _the Remi held out._ What literally?

4. +Gallôrum ... oppûgnâtio+: _the mode of attacking towns common to the
Gauls and Belgæ_.

5. +tôtis moenibus+: dative, though by some thought to be an ablative,
_all around the walls_. 228; H. 386, 2.

7. +testûdine facta+: _forming a testudo._ What the soldiers did was to
lap their shields over their heads.

8. +cum+: _since._ What mode follows +cum+ in this sense?

11. +nûntium ... mittit+: one of the expressions that are followed by
the accusative and infinitive; here, +sêse ... posse+. Compare in
chapter 1, +certior fîêbat+, followed by +Belgas ... coniûrâre+; in
chap. 4, +reperiêbat+, followed by +Belgas ortos esse+, in complete
text.

+Iccius Rêmus+: _Iccius, a Remian_.

13. +sêse+: subject-accusative of +posse+.

PAGE 26,

19. +moenibus ... mûrum ... mûrus ... mûrum+: Cæsar's haste in writing
is often manifest.

20. +coepti sunt+: it may seem strange that the passive should be used
instead of the active, +coepêrunt+; but see 143, a; H. 297, 1.

22. +Quod+: how is a relative after a period often best rendered? For an
example, see note on +qui+, chap. 1, l. 13, simplified text.

24. +nûlli+: mark the emphasis from the position. Many similar cases
occur, notwithstanding A. & G., p. 389, Rem.

+oppûgnandi+ = +oppûgnâtiônis+.

25. +summa nôbilitâte et grâtia+: a descriptive ablative; _a man of the
highest rank and popularity_.

26. +praefuerat+: render as if an imperfect. The meaning is, he had been
placed in command and was then in command.

+ex iis+: the same as +eôrum+.

27. +lêgâti+: _as envoy_. Compare the use of +obsides+ as an appositive,
p. 25, l. 26.

28. +submittâtur+: can you make out the force of the +sub+?


CHAP. 7,

line 2. +subsidio oppidânis+: _to aid the people in the town_. But what
literally? For the construction, see 233, a; H. 390.

3. +quôrum adventu+: _in consequence of their coming_.

5. +contendêrunt+: the subject is +hostes+, suggested by +hostîbus+ in
the preceding sentence.

6. +ab+: _distant, off, away_; so used chiefly with numerals.

+ab mîlibus passuum minus duôbus+: a word for word rendering would be,
_distant thousands of paces less than two_; that is, _less than two
miles distant_.

PAGE 26,

3. +neque ... côgnôvit+: _and learned from those scouts whom he had sent
and from the Remi that they were now not far distant_.

30. +îsdem ducibus+: _the same persons as guides._ Compare +qui lêgâti+,
p. 26, l. 27, and note on simplified text.

PAGE 27,

3. +apud oppidum+: +ad+ is more usual.

4. +agros ... dêpopulâti--vîcis aedificiîsque ... incênsis+: literally,
_having laid waste the fields--the villages and buildings having been
burned_. Mark how the construction changes for want of a deponent verb
in place of +incendo+.

9. +in lâtitûdinem+: compare +in altitûdinem+, p. 26, l. 13.


CHAP. 8,

line 2. +eximiam ... virtûtis+: _their eminent reputation for valor_.

3. +quid virtûte posset+: _what their real eminence in valor was_.
Compare +quid in bello possent+, chap. 4, l. 2.

7. +tantum ... patêbat quantum loci+: render as if +loci+ depended on
+tantum+ instead of +quantum+, _extended over as much space as_.

+adversus+: _facing the enemy_; +adversus+ an adjective, agreeing with
+collis+.

+in lâtitûdinem+: _laterally._ Compare chap. 7, l. 8.

8. +ex utrâque parte lateris+ = +ex utrôque latere+: _on_, not _from_,
_both sides_; so +ab+, below, l. 10.

10. +ad plânitiem redîbat+: _gradually resumed_ (impf.) _a level_. Cæsar
describes a hill over against the enemy, having steep sides, and a front
only broad enough for his army when arranged for battle. In front the
hill rose with a gentle ascent, and at the top blended with the plain.
It is possible that +lêniter fastîgâtus+ means, as the dictionaries
define this passage and as many editors say, _gently sloping down_; in
which case, +ad plânitiem redîbat+ would mean _sank down gradually to
the level at its base_. This attributes an improbable meaning to
+fastîgâtus+.

12. +extrêmas fossas+: _at the ends of the trenches_; compare in chap.
2, l. 2, +interiôrem Galliam+, _the interior of Gaul_.

+castella+: there were, then, four.

17. +êductas înstrûxerant+: to make good English, render as if +êductas+
were a verb followed by +et+; so, very often, when a perfect participle
and verb are closely connected.

PAGE 27,

10. +et ... et+: we do not say _both ... and_ so frequently as we find
+et ... et+ in Latin; accordingly it will generally be found better to
omit in translation the first +et+, and render the second _and also_.

11. +proelio ... proeliis+: _a decisive battle ... skirmishes_.

14. +loco+: ablative absolute, _as there was a place_.

21. +obdûxit+: Cæsar elsewhere commonly uses +perdûco+ of running a wall
or trench. Why +obdûco+ here? Because the +fossae+ were dug _against_
the enemy, or to _cover his position_.

24. +cum ... înstrûxisset+: Cæsar's thought was, according to Latin
idiom, _when I shall have drawn up_, +înstrûxero+; but such a future
perfect of direct speech becomes pluperfect subjunctive in narration,
after a past tense in the principal clause.

24. +quod ... poterant+: _because they were so strong in numbers_. Find
two other similar uses of +possum+.

27. +si quo opus esset+: _if there should be need of them anywhere_;
not, _if there should be need of any thing_.

28. +subsidio+: in meaning and construction like +subsidio+, p. 26,
l. 32.


CHAP. 9,

line 2. +si ... trânsîrent+: _to see if our men would cross this_
(+hanc+).

3. +contendêbâtur+: _there was fighting._ Compare chap. 6, l. 3,
+sustentâtum est+.

4. +neutri+: _neither of the two armies_.

5. +secundiôre ... nostris+: _as the cavalry skirmish proved rather
favorable to our men_.

9. +castellum+: read over again the last half of chap. 5. Cæsar makes no
mention there of a +castellum+.

10. +potuissent+: the thought was, according to the Latin idiom, "if we
shall not have been able" (+potuerimus+); but such a future perfect of
direct speech becomes a pluperfect subjunctive in narration after a past
tense.

PAGE 28,

1. +nostri autem+, etc.: a difficult sentence; but treat it as directed
in the Introductory Note, p. 43, only observing that +si+ has its usual
meaning of _if_, and +impedîtos+, _when they should get stuck fast_,
agrees with +hostes+ understood.

2. +ut ... adgrederentur+: expresses the purpose of +parâti in armis
erant+.

9. +eo cônsilio+: _with this design_; explained by +ut castellum ...
expûgnârent+.

+possent+: they said to themselves, _if we shall be able_, +poterimus+;
_but if we shall not have succeeded_, +si minus potuerimus+; hence
+potuissent+, when related. See note on +înstrûxisset+, p. 27, l. 24.

12. +nôbis ûsui+: compare +subsidio oppidânis+, p. 26, l. 32.


CHAP. 10,

line 3. +pûgnâtum est+: contains its own subject, _there was fierce
fighting_. See +contendêbâtur+, chap. 9, l. 3, and note.

4. +impedîtos+: _while they were struggling_.

6. +circumventos interfêcêrunt+: _they surrounded and killed_. Read
again the note on +êductas înstrûxerant+, chap. 8, l. 17.

7. +spem+: subject-accusative of +fefellisse+; but translate, _that they
were disappointed in the hope_.

+neque+: take the negative part with +prôgredi+.

8. +ipsos+: that is, +se ipsos+, namely, +hostes+.

10. +quemque+: subject-accusative of +reverti+. See also note on chap.
4, l. 9.

11. +quôrum ... ad eos+: you will very often find the relative clause
preceding the antecedent. In almost all such cases the English way of
speaking requires us to render the antecedent clause first.

13. +Quod+: _this_, referring to the last two sentences.

+eo cônsilio+: _with this design_, explained by the following clause.

16. +Hîs persuâdêri+: depends on +nôn poterat+. Why did not Cæsar write,
+Hi persuâdêri ... nôn poterant+, since he means, _these could not be
persuaded_? 230; H. 301, 1.

PAGE 28,

19. +reliquos ... cônantes+: _the rest ... while they were trying_.

21. +Hostes+: subject of +cônstituêrunt+, l. 25, while a pronoun
referring to +hostes+ may be mentally supplied as subject of
+intellêxêrunt+ and +vîdêrunt+. This sentence illustrates an important
principle of Latin order, attention to which will be of great aid in
translation. When the verb of the principal clause and that of the
dependent clause have the same subject, it is commonly expressed in the
principal, and left out in the dependent, clause. In English we do the
opposite. We often begin with the dependent clause; the Latin _frames it
into_ the principal clause.

21. +ubi+: repeat mentally with +vîdêrunt+ and +coepit+.

28. +ad eos dêfendendos+: illustrates a very common way of expressing a
purpose.


CHAP. 11,

line 1. +ea re+: that is, to disperse to their homes; chap. 10, l. 10.

2. +êgressi+: the subject is +Belgae+, understood.

3. +cônsimilis+: _altogether like._ What is the force of +con+?

4. +Caesar+: as the subject of +veritus+ and +continuit+, +Caesar+ seems
strangely placed in the grip of the ablative absolute; but the position
shows by whom the knowledge was got. _Caesar getting wind of this
movement immediately through his spies_.

5. +veritus+: try always to render a participle so as to show its
logical relation to the main verb, whether of time, cause, contrast,
or what not; here, _because he feared_.

+castris+: substantially equivalent to +in castris+.

6. +qui ... morârêtur+: compare +qui dêdûceret+, chap. 2, l. 3, and
note.

10. +ventum erat+: _they had come._ Compare +sustentâtum est+, chap. 6,
l. 3; +contendêbâtur+, chap. 9, l. 3.

11. +priôres+: _those in advance_.

15. +sub+: _towards._ The idea of _place_ being transferred to that of
time.

PAGE 29,

5. +quisque+: see p. 25, l. 3, and note on simplified text.

+prîmum itineris locum+: _the first place on the road_.

8. +qua ... discêderent+: following +quod ... perspêxerat+.

16. +cum ... cônsisterent+: _since the enemy, at the very extremity of
the rear, kept making a stand_.

18. +priôres+: +et+ understood; _while those in advance_.

+quod+: carry on also into the next clause; _and because they were not
held together_ (+continêrentur+).

21. +sine ûllo perîculo+: two ways of expressing "without any" in this
chapter; for above we have +nûllo certo ôrdine+, _without any definite
order_.

23. +quantum ... spatium+: _how great a space of time_ (+diêi+) _there
was_; that is (they killed as great a number) _as the length of the time
allowed_.

24. +sêque in castra ... recêpêrunt+: and they and their pitiless
commander probably slept well that night.


CHAP. 12,

line 3. +ex itinere+: see chap. 6, l. 2, and note.

+oppûgnâre+: means here _carry by assault_.

5. +omnis ... multitûdo+: notice that an adjective and a noun are often
separated by words depending on the noun. Here +ex fuga+ from the
position is almost equivalent to +fugientium+.

6. +vîneis+: wooden frames with sloping roof and covered with hides, to
protect a number of besiegers.

7. +âctis+: from +ago+, _brought up_; the +vîneae+ were often moved on
wheels.

+aggere iacto+: _when earth had been thrown up for a mound_. This was
done so that wooden towers could be brought up near the walls.

10. +ut cônservârentur+: mark how often a dependent clause precedes the
one on which it depends. Attention to this will often help in
unravelling a long sentence. Now see +qui ... dêdûceret+, chap. 2, l. 3;
+quid ... posset et ... audêrent+, chap. 8, ll. 3, 4; +qui ...
morârêtur+, chap. 11, l. 6.

PAGE 29,

32. +paucis dêfendentibus+: _though the defenders were few_.

PAGE 30,

1. +Castris mûnîtis+: _after making a fortified camp._ The first and
most important thing, after selecting the site of a camp, was to
intrench it. That may be all that is meant in this instance.

+vîneas agere+: depends on +coepit+.

+quaeque ... comparâre+: _and to get ready whatever_.

2. +ûsui+: compare +subsidio+, p. 26, l. 32.

5. +quae+: _the like of which_.


CHAP. 13,

line 1. +obsidibus acceptis+: _after receiving hostages_.

+armis ... trâditis+: it was Cæsar's practice to disarm his conquered
enemies.

3. +Qui cum+: the relative is in the right place in Latin, but we cannot
translate in this order. The natural place for both words is at the
beginning of a clause; but when they come together, the relative takes
precedence.

5. +circiter ... quînque+: _only about five miles_.

6. +abesset+: governed by +cum+.

+mâiôres nâtu+: _elders_; +seniôres+ would not do.

7. +sêse ... venîre+: _they surrendered to him unconditionally_.

9. +pueri+: _children_, as +homines+ often means _men and women_.

PAGE 30,

9. +atque+: _and besides_, or _and in particular_.

17. +neque ... contendere+: _and that they were not in arms_.

20. +passis manibus+: pitiful!


CHAP. 14,

line 1. +facit verba+: _intercedes_.

2. +in fide ... fuêrunt+: _have been faithful and friendly_.

4. +perferre+: _were enduring._ For the tense, see 336, A.

5. +êius cônsili prîncipes+: _the prime movers in this plan_:
+prîncipes+ = +auctôres+, _authors_.

6. +in Britanniam profûgêrunt+: as lately Boulanger and others have
done.

8. +clêmentia+: said of one who has power to exercise the opposite,
+sevêritas+, +crûdêlitas+.

+mânsuêtûdine+: said of one who is humane and gentle, opposed to
+feritas+.

9. +fêceris ... amplificâbis+: we say, 'if you do this, you will add
to'; in Latin, 'if you shall have done this, you will add to.'

10. +qua+: 105, d.; H. 190, 1.

+si qua bella+, etc.: _by whose aid and resources they_ (the Ædui) _are
accustomed to bear the burden of whatever wars befall them_.

PAGE 30,

26. +perferre ... dêfêcisse+: _were enduring ... had revolted_.

28. +quod intellegerent+: _seeing_.

31. +sua+: emphatic; _his own_, that is, _his well-known_.

32. +quod si fêcerit+: _if he should do this_; the subjunctive of the
future perfect, for which there is no separate form; hence the form of
the perfect subjunctive is borrowed. If the tense is named by its form,
it will be called _perfect subjunctive_; if by its meaning, _future
perfect subjunctive_.

PAGE 31,

1. +amplificâtûrum (esse)+: the subject must be inferred from the
subject of +fêcerit+.


CHAP. 15,

line 1. +honôris ... causa+: _out of regard to Divitiacus_.

3. +mâgna ... auctôritâte+: _one of great influence_; a predicate
ablative of description; such an ablative must always have a modifier,
as here, +mâgna+. The genitive may be used in the same way, as below,
+mâgnae virtûtis+. On the order, see note, chap. 12, l. 5.

6. +quôrum+, etc.: translate closely in the order of the Latin; _about
their character and customs, Cæsar, on inquiry_; so, generally, do your
best to keep close to the Latin order. Read again the Introductory Note,
p. 43.

12. +qui ... dêdissent+: _for having surrendered_; what would be the
meaning of +qui ... dêdiderant+?

PAGE 31,

6. +hominum ... praestâbat+: _was the most populous_; what is it
literally?

12. +pati+: _that they permitted._ Supply +eos+, referring to +Nervii+,
as the subject of +pati+, +esse+, +increpitâre+, and +cônfirmâre+.

13. +quod ... exîstimârent+: observe in the simplified text +quod ...
exîstimâbant+; why the difference?

16. +qui ... dêdissent ... prôiêcissent+: _for having surrendered and
renounced_; literally, _since they had surrendered_.

17. +sêse+: subject-accusative of +mîssûros+.


CHAP. 16,

line 1. +trîduum+: _for three days_, accusative of duration.

2. +Sabim+: now called the Sambre.

6. +quîque+: equivalent to +et eos qui+, _and all such as_.

+per aetâtem+: _by reason of their age_; that is, whether too old or too
young.

7. +in eum locum ... quo+: _into a place to which._ The idea of the
Latin fully expressed would be, _into a place of such a character_
(+eum+) _that to it_ (+quo+) _there would be no access for an army_.
319, 2 and note; H. 500, I. Compare +qui ... vidêrentur+, immediately
preceding.

8. +exercitui+: _for an army_, not necessarily, _for Cæsar's army_.

PAGE 31,

19. +Cum ... fêcisset+: a temporal +cum+ clause is not always best
rendered by _when_, etc.: _after marching for three days_.

24. +hîs ... persuâserant+: observe on p. 29, l. 1, an example of the
impersonal construction of +persuâdeo+ in the passive: +hîs persuâdêri
... nôn poterat+, _it was not possible for these to be persuaded_.

27. +côniêcisse+: the verb implies hurried action, and so differs from
+dêpôno+, which Cæsar uses in Book IV., 19, of putting women and
children in a place of safety.


CHAP. 17,

line 2. +qui ... dêligant+: compare +qui dêdûceret+, chap. 2, l. 3, and
note; +qui ... morârêtur+, chap. 11, l. 6.

+Cum+: _since._ See note on chap. 6, l. 8.

5. +dêmônstrârunt+: shortened from +dêmônstrâvêrunt+, 128, a, 1; H. 235.

+inter singulas+: _between each two_; the same mistake, "between each,"
is common in English.

6. +neque ... negôti+: _and it was a matter of no difficulty at all_.

7. +cum ... vênisset+: _when the first legion should reach the camping
ground._ In the direct form, +vênerit+, _shall have reached_; then
regularly such a future perfect is changed to the pluperfect subjunctive
in indirect discourse after a past tense. See note on chap 9, l. 10.

8. +sarcinis+: "Besides his arms, the Roman soldier carried stakes
(+vâlli+), used for the palisades of the camp, food and utensils, a saw,
a spade, a chain for his prisoners, and other things. He was loaded like
a mule." --LONG.

+qua pulsa+: _if this legion were beaten_.

+futûrum (esse)+: depends on +dêmônstrârunt+; _the result would be_.

9. +Nervii autem+: _now the Nervii._ +Nervii+ is the subject of
+effêcerant+. This long sentence is not so difficult as it at first
seems. Follow closely the Latin order to discover the sense, render
+quo+ _in order that_, +effêcerant+ _had caused_, and +înstar+ _like_.

11. +teneris ... ênâtis+: _by lopping the trees when young, and
intertwining the branches which grew out thick in a lateral direction_;
+ênâtis+ from +ênâscor+.

12. +interiectis+: it does not appear possible to take this word in
the sense given to it in the dictionaries, _thrown or stuffed in_. So
Moberly translates, "by throwing in brambles and thorns for the present
occasion." But is it to be supposed that this was done everywhere? If
not, how would the Nervii know where to do it? Moreover, what they had
done was done +antîquitus+, _from of old_. Translate, therefore, _by
planting among them_.

14. +quo nôn modo nôn ... sed ne ... quidem+: this formula, or (without
second +nôn+) +nôn modo ... sed ne ... quidem+, is usually awkwardly
rendered, _not only not, but not even_. Instead, translate as if the
first member were complete in itself (suppressing +modo+), followed by
_nay, nor even_, thus: _which it was not possible to pass through, nay,
nor even see through_.

15. +Hîs rêbus+: _by these obstacles_.

16. +nôn ... cônsilium+: _they ought not to disregard the advice_.

PAGE 32,

4. +impedîmentôrum+: here, _baggage animals_; +impedîmentis+, below,
_baggage_.

9. +Adiuvâbat+: the subject is the long sentence following, +Nervii ...
effêcerant+. Translate, _this circumstance favored the advice of those
who reported the intelligence, that_ (+quod+).

10. +nihil ... possent+: compare +quid in bello possent+, p. 24, l. 25;
+quid virtûte posset+, p. 27, l. 12.

11. +neque enim+: _and in fact ... not._ Observe that +enim+ here does
not mean _for_.

12. +pedestribus valent côpiis+: compare +virtûte ... valêre+, p. 25,
l. 5. The ablative is ablative of means.

13. +ad eos+: that is, the Nervii.


CHAP. 18,

line 1. +quem locum+: _I mean the place which_.

3. +Ab eo flûmine+: that is, on the other side.

4. +pari adclîvitâte collis+: _a hill of similar upward slope_;
a descriptive ablative.

+ab superiôre parte+: _in the upper part._ +Ab+ not seldom means _on,
in, at, by_, because the idea of removal (_from_) implies previous
contact or nearness, and the latent idea is sometimes the most
important.

5. +ut+: may be considered as referring to an +ita+ suppressed with
+silvestris+; _so thickly wooded that_.

+nôn ... posset+: _one could not easily see within._ Impersonal
expressions, like +perspici potest+, are common in Latin. Mark the mode
of translation.

7. +secundum+: _along_, properly _following_, from +sequor+.

PAGE 32,

24. +adversus huic et contrârius+: _corresponding to this and right
opposite_.

25. +passus ... apertus+: _clear of woods for about two hundred paces up
from its base_.

+înfimus+: +ab înferiôre parte+.


CHAP. 19,

line 1. +omnibus côpiis+: Cæsar often uses +cum omnibus côpiis+.

2. +cônsuêtûdine+: _according to custom_; just as frequently +ex
cônsuêtûdine+.

4. +conlocârat+: for +conlocâverat+. See +dêmônstrârunt+, chap. 17,
l. 5, and note.

6. +praesidiôque impedîmentis+: compare +subsidio oppidânis+, chap. 7,
l. 2, and note.

11. +opere dîmênso+: _after laying out the work_; the expression refers
to marking off the ground preparatory to trenching, making a rampart,
etc.

+castra mûnîre+: _to make a camp_.

17. +in manibus nostris+: _close upon us_.

18. +ad+: _towards_; repeat it mentally before +eos+.

+adverso colle+: _straight up the hill_; literally, _with the hill
before them_; so perhaps strictly neither an ablative absolute nor an
ablative of the "way by which."

PAGE 32,

32. +ratio ôrdôque âgminis+: _the plan and the order of marching_.

+aliter ... âc+: _otherwise than, different from what_; this strange
idiom looks like an abridged, colloquial expression; probably it was,
fully expressed, +aliter âc aliter+, _one way and another way_. The
order of march was one way and the Belgæ had reported it another way.
So I have heard a child say, "This is different and that is different,"
meaning "this is different from that."

PAGE 33,

8. +cum+: _while_; to be repeated mentally with +facerent+.

10. +neque ... cêdentes însequi audêrent+: _and while our men were
hesitating to pursue them when they retreated_.

+quem ad fînem+: translate as if it were +ad fînem ad quem+, _to the
line to which the level, clear ground extended_.

15. +ut ... cônfirmâverant+: _as they had arranged their order of battle
and ranks within the woods, and as they had encouraged each other
to do_.


CHAP. 20,

line 2. +sîgnum tuba dandum (erat)+: in order to call the men to take
their places in the ranks. Some might not see the flag.

3. +sîgnum dandum+: this time the signal is for the charge, or perhaps
to get ready for a charge.

5. +subsidio+: dative of end or service, but render as if a nominative,
which might have been used, _a help_.

7. +commode+: modifies +praescrîbere+.

+ipsi sibi praescrîbere ... poterant+: they could _direct themselves
without any orders_ (+ipsi+).

11. +nihil+: _not ... at all_; stronger than +nôn+.

12. +per se+: _on their own responsibility_.

+quae vidêbantur+: _whatever seemed best_.

PAGE 33,

27. +qui+: does not refer to +mîlites+, but to +ii+ understood.

+aggeris petendi causa+: _for the purpose of seeking materials for a
rampart_. Mark the position of +causa+, always following the genitive
depending on it.

30. +hîs difficultâtibus+: _in this strait_; but the words are in the
dative with +subsidio+. Find two other instances of this construction of
two datives.

32. +quid fieri oportêret+: the object of +praescrîbere+.


CHAP. 21,

line 1. +necessâriis rêbus imperâtis+: when you meet with +res+, ask
yourself exactly what it means, and then find a proper rendering.
Translate, _after giving the necessary orders_.

4. +prîstinae+: this word is often used of what was formerly and still
continues.

+neu ... animo+: _and not lose presence of mind_.

6. +quod ... aberant+: gives the reason of the following, not the
preceding, clause.

8. +pûgnantibus occurrit+: _he finds them fighting_.

8. +Temporis+: mark how the important word comes first. Take this
sentence in thought almost without change in the order of the words,
then translate.

+tanta ... exiguitas+: _so great was the littleness_ = _such was the
shortness_. Translate, _so short was the time_.

10. +însîgnia+: "the crests, feathers red and black, and other
decorations which the soldiers had.... On the march the helmet was not
carried on the head. The shields had leather coverings when they were
not in use." --LONG.

12. +Quam ... dêvênit+: _to whatever part of the army each one happened
to come_.

+ab opere+: that is, making the camp; see chap. 19, l. 11.

13. +quaeque ... cônspêxit+: _and whatever standards he caught sight of
first_.

PAGE 34,

13. +quo ... posset+: _whither a javelin could be hurled_ = _a javelin
throw_.

19. +Quam ... in partem+: compare the second line of the chapter.
+quisque+ seems oddly placed, but it is crowded out of the first place,
where it would like to stand, by +quam+.


CHAP. 22,

line 2. +rei mîlitâris ... ôrdo+: _military science and arrangement_.

3. +fiêbat+: _the result was_.

+aliae ... parte+: in this idiom the second part only of the thought is
expressed. '_Other legions were fighting in another part_' implies 'some
were fighting in one part of the field.' So +claudus altero pede+, _lame
in the other foot_, implies one foot sound.

5. +interiectis+: to be taken with +saepibus+.

6. +ut+: _so that_. +conlocâri+: depends on +possent+.

7. +in+: of reason, _because of_ or _owing to_.

8. +inîquitâte+: usually translated _unfavorable condition_, or by some
similar phrase, and such is the common meaning of +inîquitas+; but the
context shows that the meaning here is closer to the original sense,
that of _unevenness_; hence we may translate, _owing to such inequality
in the condition of things_.

PAGE 34,

25. +cum+: _since_, governs +impedîrêtur+ as well as +resisterent+.

+dîversis legiônibus+: +dîversus+ means _turned different ways, not with
united line_; hence here, _disjoined_. Translate, _since, owing to the
legions being separated_.

28. +neque certa subsidia+: here begins the statement of the result;
+certa subsidia+: subject of +poterant+.

+neque quid+, etc.: _nor was it possible to foresee what was needed
everywhere_. After +prôvidêri+ supply mentally +poterat+, of which the
whole preceding clause is the grammatical subject.


CHAP. 23,

line 1. +ut+: _since_. Would the mode of +cônstiterant+ have been the
same, if +cum+ had been used in place of +ut+?

2. +acie+: an old form of the genitive for +aciêi+.

+Atrebates+: object of +compulêrunt+.

6. +Ipsi+: refers to the subject of +interfêcêrunt+; that is, +legiônis
nônae et decimae mîlites+.

8. +dîversae+ = +aliae+; what should it mean from its derivation?

10. +a frônte+: _along the front_. See chap. 18, l. 4, and note.

11. +ab sinistra parte+: _on the left_. Compare +â frônte+, preceding
line, and +ab superiôre parte+, chap. 18, l. 4, and note.

+nûdâtis castris+: _as the camp was left unguarded_.

13. +aperto latere+: _on their_ (the legions') _exposed flank_.

14. +summum ... locum+: _the summit occupied by the camp_; +castrôrum+
is a possessive genitive.

PAGE 35,

3. +exanimâtos ... cônfectos+: _breathless and exhausted by wounds_.

+hîs+: the ninth and tenth legions.

4. +ea pars+: that is, +ea pars hostium+.

5. +cônantes+: accusative, agreeing with +Atrebates+ understood, or a
pronoun referring to Atrebates.

8. +resistentes hostes+: object of +côniêcêrunt+.

16. +summam imperi+: _chief command_.


CHAP. 24,

line 2. +cum ... reciperent+: _as they were returning_.

5. +cum respêxissent+: _on looking back_. A +cum+ clause is not always
best translated by a full clause.

6. +praecipites ... mandâbant+: _ran away as fast as they could._ What
literally?

7. +eôrum+: depends on +clâmor fremitusque+.

8. +ferêbantur+: _began to rush._ Observe the imperfects followed by
perfects. The imperfect paints, the perfect describes.

10. +auxili causa+: _for the purpose of rendering aid_ = _as
auxiliaries_.

11. +cum+: _since._ See note, chap. 6, l. 8.

+complêri+: this and the following infinitives depend on +vîdissent+.

13. +vîdissent+: the subject is +equites Trêveri+.

14. +rêbus+: _fortunes._ How might a clause be substituted here in Latin
for the ablative absolute?

15. +pulsos superâtôsque+: supply +esse+.

PAGE 35,

21. +pulsos+: supply +esse+.

22. +adversis hostibus occurrêbant+: _came straight against the enemy._
What literally?

23. +câlônes ... âc summo iugo+: the +porta decumâna+ was the rear gate
of the camp, opposite the +porta praetôria+. It appears from this
passage that the place for the +câlônes+ was at the back of the camp,
and that in this instance the camp was partly on sloping ground.

30. +virtûtis opînio+: _reputation for valor_.

PAGE 36,

2. +dîversos dissipâtôsque+: _running in different directions and
scattered_.

5. +hostes+: subject-accusative of +potîtos (esse)+.


CHAP. 25,

line 2. +suos urgêri+: _that his men were hard pressed_; the infinitive
depends on +vîdit+.

3. +cônfertos mîlites+: _that the soldiers by being crowded together_.

+sibi ... impedîmento+: _hindered one another_.

8. +ut ... posset+: _so that he could no longer stand_.

9. +Hîs rêbus+: _for these reasons_.

+tardiôres+: _were losing heart_.

12. +subeuntes intermittere+: _cease mounting the hill_.

12. +ab utrôque latere+: _on both flanks._ Compare +ab superiôre parte+,
chap. 18, l. 4.

13. +rem ... angusto+: _that the situation was critical._ What
literally?

14. +ûni+: a peculiar use of +ûnus+, quite equivalent to _a_; not to be
imitated in writing Latin.

17. +sîgna ... iûssit+: _he ordered them to advance and at the same time
to open out their ranks_.

PAGE 36,

7. +Caesar+: subject of +prôcessit+, fifteen lines below. This first
sentence extending through eighteen lines looks very formidable; but if
it is taken in accordance with the Introductory Note, p. 43, the meaning
will be evident. To translate the sentence is more difficult. In
translating, repeat "_and saw_" before the words +quartae cohortis+, and
render the ablative absolutes by clauses, thus: _and saw that all the
captains of the fourth cohort were killed_. Then, +reliquos esse
tardiôres+, _that the rest_ (in consequence) _were losing heart_.

8. +sîgnîsque ... conlâtis+: _and since the standards were brought
together._ Try constantly to make out the relation in thought expressed
by participles; that is, whether the idea is that of time, _when,
while_, etc.; of cause, _as, since_; of concession, _though,
notwithstanding_; or of condition, accompanying circumstances, etc., to
be variously rendered.

16. +ab novissimis+: _in the rear_. So below, l. 21. Compare +ab
sinistra parte+, p. 35, l. 13. In both places in this chapter it would
be easy to make the mistake of taking +ab+ in the sense of +ex+, as a
substitute for the partitive genitive.

27. +operam nâvâre cuperet+: "_wished to do his best_." What literally?


CHAP. 26,

line 3. +ut ... coniungerent+: _for the legions gradually to draw
together_.

7. +proelio nûntiâto+: _on the report of the battle_.

+cursu incitâto+: _quickening their speed._ The participle following is
causal; they began to run because of the report of the battle.

10. +qui+: refers to +decimam legiônem+. What is the grammatical
irregularity, and how is it to be accounted for?

+cum+: to be taken with +côgnôvissent+.

+quo in loco res esset+: _what the situation was._ What literally?
Account for the subjunctive.

12. +nihil ... fêcêrunt+: _left nothing undone in the way of speed_.
What literally?

+reliqui+: neuter of +reliquus+. A partitive genitive depending on
+nihil+. Find a similar construction in chap. 15.

PAGE 36,

31. +conversa sîgna+: the object of +înferrent+, but most conveniently
rendered as coördinate with it, _to face about and charge_. It is
thought that by this movement the twelfth and the seventh legions formed
a circle or a square.

PAGE 37,

1. +neque timêrent+: repeat +cum+ mentally from the preceding clause;
_and since they_ (no longer) _feared_.

+âversi+: literally, _being turned away_; translate, _from their rear
being unguarded_.


CHAP. 27,

line 2. +vulneribus cônfecti+: _badly wounded._ What literally?

+prôcubuissent+: from +prôcumbo+.

3. +vêro+: emphasizes +equites+, but is better left untranslated; say,
_while the cavalry_.

4. +se ... praeferrent+: _thrust themselves before_; a result clause,
dependent on +tanta ... est facta+.

5. +in extrêma spe salûtis+: "_when all hope of saving themselves was at
an end_." Here a literal translation would be meaningless or misleading.

7. +proximi ... însistêbant+: _those nearest would stand upon their
prostrate companions_.

8. +hîs deiêctis+: _when these_ (in turn) _were thrown down_.

10. +intercepta remittêbant+: _would catch and hurl back._ See +êductas
înstrûxerant+, chap. 8, l. 17, and note.

11. +ut+, etc.: _so that one ought to judge that it was not without
cause that men of such valor._ On +iûdicâre dêbêret+, compare +perspici
posset+, chap. 18, l. 5, and note.

13. +quae ... difficillimis+: _things which, most difficult in
themselves_.

+facilia+: a predicate adjective with +redêgerat+.

PAGE 37,

15. +innîxi+: from +innîtor+, agrees with +nostri+.

+perterritos+: supply +esse+; the subject-accusative is +hostes+.

16. +inermes+: agrees with +câlônes+, _even though unarmed_.

23. +qui superessent+: _the survivors._ Supply +ii+ as antecedent of
+qui+.

+ut+: _as_. So used p. 34, l. 23.

24. +cônicerent+: dependent on +tantam virtutem ... ut+; (so that)
_those who survived_ (+qui superessent+) _kept hurling_.


CHAP. 28,

line 1. +prope+: modifies +ad+, not +redâcto+.

2. +redâcto+: see the last word of the preceding chapter.

+mâiôres nâtu+: see chap. 13, l. 6, and note.

3. +pueris+: see chap. 13, l. 9, and note.

4. +cônsênsu ... supererant+: _with the consent of all the survivors_.

7. +vix ad+: _to barely_; for +ad vix+, as some say.

8. +in+: _towards_; +erga+ might have been used.

9. +vidêrêtur+: not _that he might seem_, but _that he might be seen_.

11. +se ... prohibêrent+: _refrain and keep their dependents from_;
+prohibêre+ is appropriate to +suos+, but hardly to +se+.

PAGE 37,

31. +aestuâria+: "the country lying to the north (the modern Zealand) is
low and marshy, cut up with tidewater inlets and bays." --ALLEN &
GREENOUGH.

32. +cum vîctôribus+, etc.: _since they thought there was no obstacle
for the victors, no safety for the vanquished_.

PAGE 38,

4. +mîlibus LX.+: they had promised fifty thousand; see chap. 4. It was
natural that they should exaggerate their losses.


CHAP. 29,

line 1. +auxilio Nerviis+: compare +subsidio oppidânis+, chap. 7, l. 2,
and note. Find other examples of this construction.

4. +ûnum oppidum+: supposed to be at the junction of the Sambre and
Meuse.

5. +ex omnibus in circuitu partibus+: simply, _all round_.

9. +conlocâbant+: there is a reading, +conlocârant+. If that is the true
reading, +tum+ in the preceding line would mean _besides_.

PAGE 38,

10. +cum+: _while._ Four lines below +cum+ means _though_.

16. +aditus ... pedum+: _an approach of two hundred feet in breadth, not
more_; +pedum+ depends on +aditus+.

21. +iis impedîmentis+: take with +dêpositis+, two lines below.

22. +agere âc portâre+: _drive or carry_.

24. +ûna+: _with it_; that is, the plunder.

25. +cum alias+, etc.: _since they carried on now aggressive now
defensive war._ What literally?


CHAP. 30,

line 1. +prîmo adventu+ = +cum prîmum advênisset+, _as soon as our army
had got there_.

3. +pedum XII.+: that is, +in altitûdinem+, which is expressed, chap. 5,
l. 19.

4. +oppido+: might have been +in oppido+. Cf. +castris+, chap. 11, l. 5.

5. +vîneis âctis+: +âctis+ from +ago+; see chap. 12, l. 6, and note.

+aggere exstrûcto+: an embankment of timber, stones, and earth was begun
at a distance from the walls of a town, wide enough to roll one or more
towers upon, and was carried forward by soldiers working under the
shelter of the +vîneae+ up to the defensive works.

6. +cônstitui+: _being raised_.

7. +ab tanto spatio+: _so far away._ Compare +ab mîlibus+, chap. 7,
l. 6, and note.

8. +quibusnam manibus+: _with what hands, pray_; +nam+ added for
emphasis, to point their sarcasm.

10. +conlocâre+: strangely used for +conlocâtûros (esse)+. The Aduatuci
may have thought that the Romans intended to hoist the tower upon their
wall, or they may have been joking. Which is more likely?

PAGE 39,

5. +hominibus ... contemptui+: another pair of datives. Find other
examples. The Italians of the present time do not strike one as
conspicuously shorter than the Germans.

+mâgnitûdine+: being contrasted with +brevitas+, is used in the sense
of +altitûdine+.


CHAP. 31,

line 1. +movêri+: _moving._ This word here has suggested a change of
+conlocâre+, in the last line of the preceding chapter, to +môtûros+, a
very plausible conjecture, but it spoils the joke of the Aduatuci.

5. +qui+: _since they._ Compare +qui ... dêdidissent+, chap. 15, l. 12,
and note.

8. +pro sua clêmentia+: _according to his well-known clemency_. See
chap. 14, l. 8, and note. What did they think of his clemency when he
sold 53,000 of them into slavery?

11. +trâditis armis+ = +si arma trâdidissent+, _if they should surrender
their arms_.

13. +per cruciâtum interfici+: _to be tortured to death._ What
literally?

PAGE 39,

16. +statuisset+: not _had decided_, but _should decide_. No mistake is
oftener made by beginners than in the rendering of a pluperfect
subjunctive of indirect discourse representing a future perfect of
direct discourse. Such a subjunctive is to be rendered by the auxiliary
_should_, not _had_. To tell whether a pluperfect subjunctive represents
a future perfect, think what form a speaker's words would take,
remembering that the Romans commonly used the future or future perfect
of things really future, while we very often use the present.


CHAP. 32,

line 1. +cônsuêtûdine+: ablative of cause.

3. +aries+: "a long, strong beam of wood, furnished with an iron head in
the form of a ram's head. It was suspended from a framework by a strong
chain or ropes, and worked by men, who drove it against the wall."
--LONG.

4. +in Nerviis+: _in the case of the Nervii_; a common meaning of +in+
with names of persons.

5. +ne quam ... înferant+: _not to do any harm to those who had
surrendered to the Roman people_.

7. +facere+: one would expect the future with subject-accusative, +se
factûros (esse)+. Compare +conlocâre+, for +conlocâtûros esse+, chap.
30, l. 10.

9. +prope ... adaequârent+: _came up almost to the very top_; +summam+
with +altitûdinem+. What literally?

12. +pâce sunt ûsi+ = +conquiêvêrunt+, _kept quiet_.


CHAP. 33,

line 3. +nostros+: _our commanders_, subject-accusative of +dêductûros+
and +servâtûros (esse)+.

+praesidia+: men stationed in the +castella+; see below.

4. +dêductûros ... servâtûros+: observe how frequently +esse+ is omitted
with the future participle.

+dênique+: _at any rate._ What is its usual meaning?

5. +tertia vigilia+: the Romans divided the night into four equal
divisions, watches, of about three hours each.

9. +eo concursum est+: _the soldiers hurried thither._ What literally?
Find similar constructions in chaps. 6, 9, 10, 11.

10. +in extrêma spe salûtis+: compare chap. 27, l. 5, and note. The
context shows, however, that the meaning is not quite the same here.
Translate, _as their last chance of saving themselves_.

14. +nêmo+: observe the emphasis from its position. Compare in English,
"Silver and gold have I none." +nêmo+ and +nûllus+ are often so placed.
Cf. +nûlli+, chap. 6, l. 10.

16. +ab iis qui êmerant+ = +ab emptôribus+: _by the purchasers_, who
were the +mercâtôres+, traders who followed the army as hungry sharks
follow a ship.

+capitum+: we say "souls." It depends on +quînquâginta trium+.

17. +quînquâginta trium+: 53,000 captives, probably chained in gangs and
sent to be sold in the Province and in Italy; a source of great gain to
the general.

PAGE 40,

4. +mîlites ... mîlitibus+: another evidence of haste. See p. 26, l. 19,
and note.

5. +ne quam ... iniûriam+: see p. 39, l. 28, and note.

9. +iis+: with +armis+. Observe the order of the words.

10. +vîminibus intextis+: repeat mentally +ex+ before these words. Some
supply +factis+.

16. +pûgnâtumque+, etc.: translate as if +hostibus+ and +viris+ were
subjects.

17. +ut ... dêbuit+: _as brave men ought to fight._ What literally?

18. +iacerent+: the subjunctive shows that the remark is a general one.
The indicative would have a limiting force. The difference can hardly be
brought out in translation. In the former case we may render, _against
men who could throw_; in the latter, _against those who were throwing_.

20. +ad+ = +circiter+.


CHAP. 34,

line 2. +mîserat+: _had sent_, that is, before the defeat of the
Aduatuci.

5. +diciônem+: _under the sway_; in some texts, +in dêditiônem+. If that
reading is correct, the meaning would be, _were brought to surrender_.


CHAP. 35,

line 1. +pâcâta+: see p. 23, l. 7, and note.

4. +qui ... pollicêrentur+: compare p. 23, l. 19, +qui ... dêdûceret+;
p. 29, l. 12, +qui ... morârêtur+; p. 31, l. 30, +qui ... dêligant+.

6. +inita proxima aestâte+: see p. 23, l. 18, and note.

10. +ex litteris+: _in consequence of the letters_.

11. +supplicâtio+: a public, religious festival of thanksgiving, decreed
by the senate. "The fifteen days' rejoicing marks the constant fear of
the Gauls which had haunted the Romans ever since the 'dies Alliensis.'
Kraner remarks that the longest 'supplicatio' till this had been one of
twelve days, for Pompeius' success against Mithridates." --MOBERLY.

+nûlli+: see p. 40, l. 22; also p. 26, l. 24, and note.




EXERCISES ON SIMPLIFIED TEXT.

The references are to the Grammars of Allen and Greenough, and Harkness.

The learner is expected, before writing the Exercises, to review the
Latin text, and find therein and commit to memory illustrations of the
grammatical principles selected.


CHAPTER I.

  1. Indirect Discourse: 336, 1 and 2; H. 523 and I.
  2. +Cum+ Temporal with Subjunctive: 325; H. 521, II. and 2.
  3. Subjunctive after Verbs of Fearing: 331, f.; H. 498, III.

1. Cæsar was in hither Gaul.

2. Reports were brought into hither Gaul.

3. While Labienus was in Gaul, the Belgæ made a league.[1]

4. A report is brought that[2] the Belgæ are conspiring.

5. They are afraid that our army is coming[3] against them.

6. They are vexed[4] that our army remains in Gaul.

7. Cæsar feared that the Belgæ were conspiring.

8. Letters kept coming,[5] while they were conspiring.

    [NOTES.--
    1. made a league: one word in Latin.
    2. Be careful about the _that_ clause in this and the following
    sentence. Recall the text to memory and mentally apply the rules.
    3. is coming: use +venio+.
    4. are vexed: in Latin one of the expressions, like +rûmôres
    adferêbantur+, requiring the accusative and infinitive.
    5. kept coming: one word in Latin.]


CHAPTER II.

  1. Relative Clauses of Purpose: 317, 2 and N.; H. 497, I.
  2. Accus. and Infin. of Indirect Discourse: 336, 1 and 2; H. 523
    and I.

1. In hither Gaul there[1] were two legions.

2. Two new legions Cæsar levies.

3. The two new legions are sent into the interior of Gaul.

4. Cæsar sends his lieutenant to lead[2] them.[3]

5. Pedius was sent to lead the new legions.

6. The Senones report that the Belgians are gathering.[4]

7. The Senones informed Cæsar about the Belgians.

    [NOTES.--
    1. there: omit.
    2. to lead; do not express a purpose in Latin by the infinitive.
    3. them: +eas+.
    4. are gathering: a passive form in Latin, because the sense is,
    _are being collected together_.]


CHAPTER III.

  1. Ablative of Means: 248, 8, c; H. 420.
  2. Ablative with +potior+, +ûtor+, etc.: 249; H. 421, I.
  3. Accus. and Infin. of Indirect Discourse: 336, 2; H. 523, I.

1. Cæsar came unexpectedly to the borders of the Remi.

2. The Remi said they had not combined[1] against the Roman people.

3. They said they were ready to give hostages.

4. All the rest of the Belgæ[2] had joined[3] with the Germans.

5. They aided Cæsar with corn and other[4] things.

6. The Remi and their[5] kinsmen enjoy the same laws.

    [NOTES.--
    1. they had not combined: _themselves not to have combined_.
    2. of the Belgæ: not the genitive.
    3. had joined: in Latin, _had joined themselves_, if you use
    +coniungo+.
    4. +aliis+.
    5. their: omit.]


CHAPTER IV.

  1. Indirect Questions: 334; H. 529, 1.
  2. Substantive Clauses of Result: 332; H. 501.

1. Whence[1] did very many of the Belgæ[2] spring?

2. Cæsar asked whence very many of the Belgæ sprung.

3. What states are in arms?

4. Cæsar asked what states were in arms.

5. While Divitiacus was king, he was most powerful.

6. From Galba's foresight and justice it results that he is a powerful
king.

7. From the valor of the Bellovaci it came about that they demanded the
management[3] of the war.

    [NOTES.--
    1. Whence: +unde+.
    2. of the Belgæ: not the genitive.
    3. management: +summa+.]


CHAPTER V.

  1. +Interest+ with Gen. of Person: 222; H. 406, III.
  2. Infin. with Subject-Accus. as Subject: 270; H. 538.
  3. Infin. with Subject-Accus. as Object: 272 and Rem.; H. 534.

1. The children of the leading men are brought to Cæsar as hostages.

2. He orders all the children to be brought to him.[1]

3. It concerns Cæsar for[2] the senate to come to him.

4. It concerns Divitiacus to send the forces of the Ædui.

5. Cæsar sees that[3] the forces of the Belgæ are hastening.

6. He learns that the Axona is not far away.

7. This river he crossed[4] and protected his camp by means of its
banks.

    [NOTES.--
    1. him: in Latin, _himself_.
    2. for: not to be expressed in Latin.
    3. that: be careful about _that_-clauses.
    4. he crossed: use +trânseo+.]


CHAPTER VI.

  1. Ablative of Separation: 243; H. 413.
  2. +Cum+ Causal with Subjunctive: 326; H. 517.
  3. Ablative Absolute: 255 and Note on p. 262; H. 431.

1. The enemy formed a testudo and advanced close to[1] the wall.

2. The enemy having hurled stones[2] made a testudo.

3. Since there were so many,[3] they undermined the wall.

4. They easily cleared the walls of soldiers.

5. The Belgæ having cleared the wall made an attack.[4]

6. Having made an attack[5] they threw missiles against the wall.

7. Since the missiles were many, no one was able to stand on the wall.

    [NOTES.--
    1. advanced close to: one word in Latin.
    2. having hurled stones: say, _stones having been hurled_. Why?
    3. so many: +tot+.
    4. attack: use +impetus+.
    5. having made an attack: not +impetum facti+.]


CHAPTER VII.

  1. Ablative of Cause: 245; H. 416.
  2. Perfect Participles of Deponents: 135, b.; H. 231, 2.

1. At midnight archers and slingers were sent by Cæsar to the town.

2. On account of the assistance of the archers and slingers, the people
in the town[1] had good hopes.

3. The enemy had no hope of taking[2] the town, because of the coming of
Cæsar's soldiers.

4. Cæsar, delaying[3] a little while, sent aid to Iccius.

5. The enemy, after laying waste the fields, hastened against Cæsar's
camp.

    [NOTES.--
    1. people in the town: one word in Latin.
    2. of taking: +expûgnandi+.
    3. delaying: not present participle.]


CHAPTER VIII.

  1. Indirect Questions: 334; H. 529, I.
  2. Partitive Genitive: 216; H. 396, IV.

1. What can the enemy do by their valor?

2. Cæsar tries what the valor of the enemy is capable of.[1]

3. How much do our men dare?

4. Cæsar makes trial of the daring[2] of his men.

5. How much space can Cæsar's army occupy?

6. Cæsar explains[3] over how much space the hill extended in front.

    [NOTES.--
    1. is capable of: _can_.
    2. the daring of, etc.: recast the sentence mentally before
    translating, thus: _Cæsar makes trial what his men dare_.
    3. explains: +docet+.]


CHAPTER IX.

  1. Clauses of Purpose: 317 and 1; H. 497, II.
  2. The Gerundive: 113, d, 2 and 296; H. 544, I.

1. He begins to[1] cross the river.

2. They began to lead their forces across.

3. They lead their forces over in order to take the redoubt.

4. Cæsar has shown that the river was behind him.[2]

5. They will cross so as to lay waste the lands of the Remi.

    [NOTES.--
    1. He begins to: _makes a beginning of_.
    2. him: should it be +eum+ or +se+?]


CHAPTER X.

  1. Passive of Intransitive Verbs: 230; H. 301, 1.
  2. Accusative of Limit: 258, b and N. 1; H. 380, II. 2.
  3. Substantive Clauses of Purpose: 331 and N. 1; H. 498.

1. Those of the Belgæ who were not killed returned home.

2. They resolve to fight in their own territories.

3. They decide that it is best[1] to lead over their army.

4. Divitiacus cannot be persuaded[2] to advance to an unfavorable place.

5. The Ædui were persuaded to return to their homes.

6. The enemy advancing into the river were surrounded.

    [NOTES.--
    1. that it is best: _it to be best_.
    2. recast the clause, before trying to turn it into Latin.]


CHAPTER XI.

  1. Ablative of Time: 256; H. 429.
  2. Perfect Participles: 290, d. 1 and 2; H. 550, N. 4.

1. On the departure of the enemy Cæsar sent ahead all his cavalry.

2. At sunset the three legions returned[1] into camp.

3. In the second watch they attacked the enemy's rear.

4. The Belgæ, fearing[2] an attack, set out at daybreak.

5. The spies, having seen[3] the fugitives, bring back word.[4]

6. Cæsar, after keeping his soldiers in camp, ordered Labienus to set
out.

    [NOTES.--
    1. returned: two words in Latin.
    2. fearing: the participle +veritus+ does not usually denote
    time _prior_ to that of the main verb in the sentence, like most
    perfect participles, but the same time.
    3. having seen: do not say +vîsi+.
    4. bring back word: use +renûntio+.]


CHAPTER XII.

  1. Ablative of Cause, 245; H. 413.
  2. Ablative Absolute: 255 and Note on p. 262; H. 431.

1. Cæsar could not take the town on account of the great number[1] of
the Suessiones.

2. Owing to[2] the works of the Romans, their "vineæ" and towers, the
Suessiones send envoys.[3]

3. The next day Cæsar made a forced march and[4] tried to take the town.

4. The townsmen,[5] making a surrender, got their request.[6]

5. Because of their surrender they got their request.

6. The surrender made, they were spared.

    [NOTES.--
    1. great number: one word in Latin.
    2. Owing to: like "on account of," not separately expressed in
    Latin.
    3. envoys: use +lêgâtus+.
    4. made a forced march and: a different turn in Latin.
    5. townsmen: use +oppidânus+.
    6. got their request: one word.]


CHAPTER XIII.

  1. +Cum+ Temporal with Subjunctive: 325; H. 521, II. 2.
  2. Constructions with +peto+: 239, c. N. 1; H. 374, 2, N. 4.

1. When the arms had been given up,[1] the elders came forth.

2. All the elders came out of Bratuspantium and begged Cæsar for
peace.[2]

3. Cæsar, when he had received their submission, asked the men for
their[3] arms.

4. According to their[4] custom they stretched out their hands and asked
the Romans for peace.

    [NOTES.--
    1. Render this clause in two ways: first by two words, then by
    a full clause. So each of the three following sentences contains
    a clause to be rendered in two ways.
    2. Cæsar for peace: quite otherwise in Latin.
    3. their: omit.
    4. their: is this to be expressed by +eôrum+?]


CHAPTER XIV.

  1. Ablative of Means: 248, 8, c; H. 420.
  2. Ablative with +ûtor+, etc.: 249; H. 421, I.

1. Divitiacus intercedes for the conquered Belgæ.

2. Divitiacus begs that Cæsar will show[1] clemency.

3. Cæsar will exercise kindness toward the Belgæ.

4. By the help of the Belgæ the Ædui sustain wars.

5. Divitiacus says the chiefs had fled to[2] Britain.

6. If you show[3] clemency, you will increase our influence.

7. Whatever[4] war befalls, by means of their[5] resources we shall be
able to hold out.

    [NOTES.--
    1. will show: not the future in Latin.
    2. to: not +ad+.
    3. show: not well rendered by present indicative.
    4. whatever: _if any_.
    5. their: +eôrum+.]


CHAPTER XV.

  1. Partitive Genitive: 216; H. 396, IV.
  2. Ablative of Quality: 251; H. 419, II.
  3. Causal Relative Sentences: 320, e; H. 517.

1. The territories of the Nervii border on the Ambiani.

2. The Nervii blame the Ambiani for having surrendered.[1]

3. The Nervii have[2] great influence among the Belgæ.

4. They use no wine, because it weakens[3] character.

5. Those men think minds lose energy through wine.

    [NOTES.--
    1. for having surrendered: turn by a relative clause.
    2. have: say _are_ (men) _of_.
    3. because it weakens: a relative clause with subjunctive, to
    indicate their view, as distinguished from a statement of fact.]


CHAPTER XVI.

  1. Comparative +amplius+, etc.: 247, c.; H. 417, N. 2.
  2. Accusative of Time and Space: 256 and 257; H. 379.

1. The Nervii were distant a three days' march.

2. Cæsar finds out that they are ten miles distant.

3. He learns from prisoners what the Nervii are doing.[1]

4. They have taken a position more than five miles from the Sambre.

5. He learns from prisoners that he[2] is waited for by the Nervii.

    [NOTES.--
    1. are doing: be careful about the mode.
    2. that he: _himself_.]


CHAPTER XVII.

  1. Use of +quisquam+: 202, c.; H. 457.
  2. Relative Clauses of Purpose: 317; H. 497, I.
  3. Substitutes for Partitive Gen.: 216, c.; H. 397, N. 3.

1. Certain of the Belgæ went by night to the camp of the Nervii.

2. Cæsar says that certain men went[1] to the Nervii.

3. Many of the prisoners found out about the legions.

4. They were sent to their friends to report[2] the matter.

5. To lop trees is a matter[3] of no difficulty at all.

6. Men were sent ahead to select[4] a suitable place.

    [NOTES.--
    1. went: _to have gone_.
    2. to report: not the infinitive.
    3. matter, etc.: recast, before trying to turn into Latin.
    4. to select: try two ways.]


CHAPTER XVIII.

  1. Descriptive Ablative: 251; H. 419, II.
  2. Clauses of Result: 319; H. 500, I. and II.

1. Along the river Sambre were trees[1] of great height.[2]

2. Among these trees the Nervii keep themselves hidden.

3. So[3] close together[4] were these trees that the Romans could not
see through.

4. The river is of such depth that men can cross.

5. On the open ground are pickets of great courage.

    [NOTES.--
    1. trees: +arbor+, fem.
    2. height: the same word that means _depth_.
    3. So: +ita+.
    4. close together: +crêber+.]


CHAPTER XIX.

  1. Dative of Service: 233 a; H. 390.
  2. Imperfect of Repeated Action: 277; H. 469, II.
  3. Ablative of Manner: 248 and Rem.; H. 419, III.

1. The cavalry of the enemy kept making attacks.

2. They would attack our horsemen with great courage.

3. These horsemen had been sent ahead by Cæsar as a protection to the
camp.

4. Again and again did the enemy pour forward from the woods, where they
had hidden.

5. The slingers and archers helped[1] the horsemen.

6. With great speed they would run as far as[2] the woods.

7. With wonderful bravery they engage in battle with the Nervii.

    [NOTES.--
    1. helped: two words in Latin.
    2. as far as: +ad+, or +usque ad+.]


CHAPTER XX.

  1. The Gerundive: 113, d.; H. 234.
  2. Dative of Apparent Agent: 232; H. 388.
  3. Ablative of Agent with +â+ or +ab+: 246; H. 415, I.

1. The soldiers are directed[1] by Cæsar.

2. The soldiers must be directed by Cæsar.

3. The flag was displayed by the soldiers.

4. The flag had to be displayed by the soldiers.

5. Experience is often helpful[2] to soldiers.

6. The work is hindered by[3] the near approach[4] of the enemy.

    [NOTES.--
    1. are directed: use +doceo+.
    2. helpful: turn by a noun.
    3. by the near approach: why not +â+ or +ab+?
    4. near approach: one word.]


CHAPTER XXI.

  1. Ablative of Gerundive with Prepositions: 301; H. 544, 2.
  2. Gerundive Construction instead of Gerund: 296; H. 544, 1.
  3. Purpose expressed by Gerundive: 318 and b; H. 544, 2, N. 2.

1. In looking for his shield a soldier lost time.

2. Time is wanting for putting on a helmet.

3. Seeing[1] the standards, each one went forward.

4. A line was drawn up[2] to resist[3] the enemy's charge.

5. Cæsar encouraged the tenth legion for the purpose of strengthening[4]
their courage.

    [NOTES.--
    1. seeing: not the gerundive.
    2. A line was drawn up: see chap. xx.
    3. resist: +sustineo+.
    4. strengthening: use +cônfîrmo+.]


CHAPTER XXII.

  Clauses of Result with +ut (ut nôn)+: 319; H. 500, II.

1. So dense was the hedge that it obstructed the view.

2. The result was that no legion could execute orders.

3. One legion opposes the foe in one part, another in another.


CHAPTER XXIII.

  1. Place to which: 258; H. 380, I.
  2. Place from which: 258; H. 412, I.
  3. Place in which: 258, 4, and 260, b.; H. 425, 1.

1. The Roman soldiers drive the enemy, exhausted by wounds, into an
unfavorable place.

2. They followed them up from the left part of the line.

3. As they attempted[1] to cross the river, a great part of them were
put to the sword.

4. In another part many of the Belgians were killed.

5. On the front the Belgæ pushed for the camp.

6. But at last they were put to flight.

    [NOTE.--
    1. attempted: recast the sentence and express _as they
    attempted_ by a participle referring to _a great part_.]


CHAPTER XXIV.

  1. Position of +causa+ with genitive: 245, c.
  2. Temporal Clauses with +cum+: 325; H. 521, II. 2.

1. The Romans see that the horsemen are scared.

2. Horsemen were coming to Cæsar to render aid.

3. When the camp-followers had gone out for the purpose of plundering,
they saw that our men were fleeing.

4. Seeing the slingers flee,[1] they fled themselves.[2]

    [NOTES.--
    1. flee, _to flee_.
    2. themselves: use +ipse+.]


CHAPTER XXV.

  1. Ablative Absolute: 255 and a.; H. 431, 4.
  2. Perfect Participles of Deponents: 290, d.; H. 195, 2.
  3. Substitutes for Perf. Act. Partc.: 290, d. 2; H. 550, N. 4.

1. Cæsar saw that the soldiers of the twelfth legion were hard pushed.

2. Cæsar, seeing[1] the soldiers of the twelfth legion hard pushed, went
to the right wing.

3. As[2] all the standard-bearers were wounded, the standards were lost.

4. Then Cæsar snatched a shield from a soldier.

5. The soldiers renewed their courage and delayed[3] the enemy's attack.

    [NOTES.--
    1. seeing: not well rendered +videns+; try casting into a
    clause--first with +ubi+, then with +cum+.
    2. As ... wounded: use a participial construction.
    3. renewed and delayed: it is better not to turn into Latin by
    coördinate verbs.]


CHAPTER XXVI.

  1. Partitive Genitive: 216; H. 397.
  2. Indirect Questions: 334; H. 529, I. & II.
  3. Dative of Service and of Object: 233 and a.; H. 390.

1. One was sent for assistance to another.[1]

2. The soldiers of two legions guarded the baggage.[2]

3. He saw in how great peril the camp was.

4. They will leave nothing undone[3] in point of courage.

5. He will report to me in what state the army is.

6. He saw that the tenth was fighting very bravely.

    [NOTES.--
    1. another: bring the two forms of +alius+ together.
    2. guarded the baggage: make a different turn.
    3. leave nothing undone: a strange Latin idiom.]


CHAPTER XXVII.

  1. Temporal Clauses with +cum+: 325; H. 521, 2.
  2. Clauses of Result with +ut (ut nôn)+: 319; H. 500, II.
  3. Clauses of Purpose with +ut (ne, ut ne)+: 317; H. 497, II.

1. So great is the courage of the Nervii that they fight from the heaps
of corpses.

2. Ascending[1] very high banks, they displayed the greatest courage.

3. They dared to cross a wide stream in order to renew the fight.

4. The cavalry, to wipe out[2] their disgrace, advance even into a
disadvantageous position.

5. The greatness of their spirit rendered difficult things easy.

    [NOTES.--
    1. ascending: turn by a clause with +cum+.
    2. To wipe out: not the infinitive.]


CHAPTER XXVIII.

  1. Ablative of Separation: 243; H. 413.
  2. Substitutes for Partitive Genitive: 216, c; H. 397, N. 3.
  3. Substantive Clauses of Purpose with +ut (ne)+: 331; H. 498.

1. Of five hundred senators, three were left.

2. Out of forty (+quadrâginta+) thousand men, four hundred were able to
bear arms.

3. Cæsar will keep their[1] neighbors from doing[2] harm.

4. The name and nation of the Nervii are reduced[3] almost to
destruction.

5. He orders the neighboring people to refrain from doing harm to the
Nervii.[4]

    [NOTES.--
    1. their: not +suus+.
    2. doing: omit.
    3. reduced: participle used as an adjective in the neuter
    plural.
    4. Nervii: genitive.]


CHAPTER XXIX.

  1. Limit of Motion: 258 and b; H. 380 and 2.
  2. Accusative of Duration of Time: 256; H. 379.
  3. Locative Ablative with Preps.: 260, b; H. 425, I.

1. They carry all their property into one town.

2. During two days they hold out very bravely.

3. For many years they were harassed by the Gauls.

4. On two sides they have high rocks; on another, a wall.

5. Leaving six thousand men this side[1] the Rhine, they return[2] home.

    [NOTES.--
    1. this side: +cis+.
    2. return: commonly +revertor+ in the present, +reverti+ in the
    perfect.]


CHAPTER XXX.

  1. Ablative of Time _when_: 256; H. 429.
  2. Imperfect of Repeated Action: 277; H. 469, II.
  3. Perfect of Completed Action: 279; H. 471, I. and 6.

1. On the day of our arrival frequent sallies were made by the enemy
from the town.

2. During the first days they taunted us from the walls.

3. At a distance the soldiers made an "agger" and a tower.

4. Then the Aduatuci began to jeer.[1]

5. Can[2] men of such little stature place a tower on our wall?

    [NOTES.--
    1. jeer: two words in Latin.
    2. begin with +num+.]


CHAPTER XXXI.

  1. Causal Relative Clauses: 320, e; H. 517.
  2. Dative with certain Intrans. Verbs: 227; H. 385.
  3. Future Conditions less vivid: 307, b; H. 509, N. 1.

1. They surrender to Cæsar, since he is so powerful.[1]

2. The envoys say the enemy are jealous of their[2] valor.

3. It is better to endure death than slavery.

4. If Cæsar should rob the Aduatuci of their arms,[3] they would be
killed.

5. Their enemies would kill them, if they should surrender their arms.

6. It is better to persuade them to give up their arms.

    [NOTES.--
    1. is so powerful: _can so much_ (+tantum+).
    2. their: express by the proper form of +suus+.
    3. of their arms: not the genitive.]


CHAPTER XXXII.

  1. Ablative of Cause: 245; H. 416.
  2. Clauses of Result with +ut (ut nôn)+: 319; H. 500, II.
  3. Substantive Clauses of Purpose with +ut (nê)+: 331; H. 498.

1. They order the people to deliver up their arms.

2. Through Cæsar's orders, no wrong will be inflicted.

3. Cæsar spared, according to his custom, those who had surrendered.[1]

4. Cæsar orders the neighbors of the Nervii not to harm them.[2]

5. There is so great a quantity of arms in the town that a third part is
concealed.

    [NOTES.--
    1. those who had surrendered: one word in Latin.
    2. them: dative.]


CHAPTER XXXIII.

  1. Causal Clauses with +cum+: 326; H. 517.
  2. Ablative Absolute: 255 and a; H. 431, 4.
  3. Pass. of Intrans. Verbs used impersonally: 230; H. 465, 1.

1. [1]The Aduatuci fought very spiritedly.

2. [1]Thither hasten all the forces of the town.

3. After the shutting[2] of the gates, the townsmen formed a plan.

4. Since they had been driven back, they no longer[3] defended
themselves.

5. Now[4] that the town was occupied, the booty was sold.

    [NOTES.--
    1. Use the passive construction.
    2. After the shutting: turn in two ways.
    3. no longer: +nôn iam+.
    4. Now that the town was occupied: turn in two ways.]


CHAPTER XXXIV.

  1. Ablative of Agent with +â (ab)+: 246; H. 415, I.
  2. Accus. and Infin. of Indirect Discourse: 330, 2; H. 523, I.

1. All the maritime states were subdued by Cæsar.

2. Cæsar says that the maritime states have been reduced.

3. At this time P. Crassus had been sent with one legion.

4. Crassus informs Cæsar that one legion has been sent to the Veneti.

5. The Veneti, to whom one legion had been sent, border on the ocean.


CHAPTER XXXV.

  1. Relative Clauses of Purpose: 317, 2; H. 497, I.
  2. Verbs of Promising, Hoping, etc.: 380, f.; 535, II.
  3. Dative with Certain Adjectives: 234, a; H. 391, I.

1. The embassies promised to return[1] the next summer.

2. Near the Rhine were many nations of barbarians.

3. These barbarians promised to do Cæsar's bidding.

4. The barbarians send men to give[2] hostages.

5. So great was the joy[3] that a thanksgiving was decreed.

    [NOTES.--
    1. to return: in the Latin idiom, _themselves to be going to
    return_.
    2. to give: put in two ways.
    3. joy: +gaudium+.]




VOCABULARY.

If the learner, as often as he refers to this vocabulary for the meaning
of a word, will glance over the group of words given in the Etymological
Vocabulary under the same root, he will find his knowledge of the
relations and meaning of words, and consequently his power to read
Latin, rapidly increase.


+Â+ or +Ab (abs)+, prep. w. abl. [APA-], _from, away from_, 6, 13, 18,
24, 25; _at the hands of_, 31, 33; _away, at a distance of_, 1, 30; _in,
on, at_, 23, 25; _by_, 1, 5, 9, etc.

+Ab·dô+, 3, -didî, -ditum [2 DA-], _put away; hide_, 19.

+Ab·sum+, -esse, âfuî [ES-], _be away from_, 11; _be distant_, 4, 5, 6,
13, 10, 17, 21; with â or ab and abl.

+Âc+, see +At·que+.

+Ac·cêdô (adc-)+, 3, -cessî, -cessum [CAD-], _go towards, approach_, 13,
w. ad and acc.; _arise, increase in_, 7, with dat.

+Ac·cidô (adc-)+, 3, -cidî, -- [CAD-], _fall to_ or _towards; befall,
happen_, 35; w. dat.
  Cf. incidô, êveniô.

+Ac·cipiô (adc-)+, 3, -cêpî, -ceptum [CAP-], _take to one's self;
accept_, 15; _receive_, 13; _suffer_, 33.

+Acervus+, -î, M. [1 AC-], _thing brought to a point; pile, heap_, 32.

+Aciês+, êî- (-e, 23), F. [1 AC-], _edge; line of battle, army_, 8, 9,
19, 20, 23, 25.

+Âcr·iter+, adv. [1 AC-], _sharply; fiercely, desperately_, 10, 33.

+Ad+, prep. w. acc., _to, towards_, 8, 13, 28, etc.; _up to_, 17;
_near_, 4, 19, 21, 33; _for_, 1, 4, 8, 21, etc.; _after, according
to_, 31.

+Ad·aequô+, 1 [IC-, AIC-], _make equal to, equal_, 32.

+Ad·clîvis (acc-)+, -e, adj. [CLÎ-], _sloping upward_, 29.
  Cf. dêclîvis.

+Ad·clîvitâs (acc-)+, -âtis, F. [CLÎ-], _upward slope, rise_, 18.
  Cf. dêclîvitâs, dêiectus.

+Ad·com·modô (acconm-)+, 1 [2 MA-, MAD-], _fit_ or _adapt to; put
on_, 21.
  Cf. induô.

+Ad·dûcô+, 3, -dûxî, -ductum [DVC-], _lead_ or _bring to_, 5; _lead up_,
1; w. ad and acc.

+Ad·eô+, -îre, -iî, -itum [1 I-], _go to; reach, get at_, 7.

+Ad·ferô (aff-)+, -ferre, attulî, allâtum [1 FER-], _bring_ or _carry
to_, 1.

+Ad·fînitâs (aff-)+, -âtis, F. [2 FID-], _relationship by marriage_, 4.
  Cf. propînquitâs.

+Ad·gredior (agg-)+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go to, approach; attack_,
9, 10.
  Cf. adorior.

+Ad·iciô+, 3, -iêcî, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _throw to_ or _against; hurl,
cast_, 21.

+Ad·itus+, -ûs, M. [1 I-, AI-], _going to, approach_, 16, 29; _access,
admittance_, 15.

+Ad·iuvô+, 1, -iûvî, -iûtum [DIV-, DI-, DIAV-], _help, aid_, 17.

+Ad·ministrô+, 1 [2 MAN-, MI-], _put the hand to; attend to_, 20, 22.

+Ad·orior+, 4, -ortus [OL-, OR-], _rise up against; attack_, 11, 17.
  Cf. adgredior.

+Ad·propînquô (app-)+, 1 [PARC-, PLEC-], _come near to, approach_, 10,
31, w. dat.; 19, w. ad and acc.
  Cf. subeô, succêdô.

+Aduâtucî+, -ôrum, M., _tribe, originally German, in Belgian Gaul, on
left bank of the Maas_, 4, 16, 29, 31.

+Ad·ventus+, -ûs, M. [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _coming to_ or _drawing near;
approach, arrival_, 7, 16, 25, 27, 30.
  Cf. successus, aditus.

+Ad·versus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of advertô) [VERT-], _turned to_ or
_towards; opposite, in the face_, 8, 18, 24; adversô colle, _up hill_,
19; w. dat.

+Aedi·ficium+, -î, N. [AID-; FAC-], _building_, 7.

+Aeduî+, -ôrum, M., _powerful Celtic people between upper courses of
Loire and Seine_, 5, 10, 14, 15.

+Aeduus+, -a, -um, adj., _Aeduan_, 5, 14.

+Aegrê+, adv., _with regret_ or _displeasure; barely, with
difficulty_, 6.

+Aequâl·iter+, adv. [IC-, AIC-], _evenly_, 18.

+Aestâs+, -âtis, F. [AID-], _burning season; summer_, 2, 35.

+Aestuârium+, -î, N. [AID-], _pertaining to rolling; inlet,
sea-marsh_, 28.

+Aetâs+, -âtis, F. [1 I-, AI-], _age, old age_, 16.

+Ager+, -grî, M. [AG-], _cultivated land; land, field_, 4, 5, 7, 9.

+Ag·ger+, -eris, M. [GER-], _that which is brought to a place_, i.e.
_materials for a mound_, 20; _mound, rampart_, 12, 30, 32.

+Âgmen+, -inis, N. [AG-], _that which is set in motion; marching
column_, 11, 17, 19, 23, 26.

+Agô+, 3, êgî, âctum [AG-], _put in motion; bring up_, 12, 30; _take
along_, 29; _carry on, do_, 20.

+Aliâs+, adv. (acc. pl. F. of alius) [2 AL- (ALI-)], _at another time_;
aliâs ... aliâs, _at one time ... at another_, 29.

+Aliênus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 AL-, (ALI-)], _belonging to another,
another's_, 10.

+Al·iter+, adv. [2 AL-], _otherwise, in another manner_, 19.

+Alius+, -a, -ud, adj., gen. alîus [2 AL- (ALI-)], _other, another,
different_, 20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 31.

+Alter+, -era, -erum, adj., gen. -ius [2 AL-], _other (of two)_, 5, 21;
alter ... alter, _the one ... the other_.

+Altitûdô+, -inis, F. [1 AL-], _elevation, height_, 5, 12, 18, 31, 32.

+Altus+, -a, -um, adj. [1 AL-], _become great by nourishment; lofty,
high_, 27, 29.

+Ambiânî+, -ôrum, M., _Belgian tribe near modern Amiens_, 4, 15.

+Amîcitia+, -ae, F. [AM-], _friendship_, 14.

+Â·mittô+, 3, -mîsî, -mîssum [MIT-], _let go from one's self; lose_, 25.

+Ampli·ficô+, 1 [PLE-, PLO-; FAC-], _make larger, increase_, 14.

+Am·plius+, adv. (N. compar. of amplus) [ambi-; PLE-, PLO-], _more_, 7,
16, 29.

+Andocumborius+, -î, M., _man of high rank among the Remi_, 3.

+Andês+, -ium, M., _tribe of Gaul north of the Loire, modern Anjou_, 35.

+Angustus+, -a, -um, adj., _contracted; narrow, difficult_; +in
angustô+, _in a critical state_, 25.

+Animus+, -î, M. [AN-], _soul; mind, feelings_, 21; _spirit, courage_,
15, 21, 25, 27; _character_, 1.

+Annus+, -î, M., _that which goes round; year_, 29.

+Ante+, [ANT-], _before_; as adv., = anteâ, _before, formerly_, 12, 22,
33; as prep. w. acc., _before_ (of time), 35; (of place), 32.

+Antîquitus+, adv. [ANT-], _from ancient times; in olden times_, 4;
_from of old_, 17.

+A·pertus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of aperiô) [2 PAR-, POR-], _without
covering; open, unobstructed_, 18, 19; _uncovered, exposed_, 23.

+Ap·pellô (adp-)+, 1 [PAL-, PEL-], _bring one's self to a person;
accost, address_, 25; _call_, 4.

+Ap·ud+, prep. w. acc. [APA-], _near, among_, 2, 4, 7, 14.

+Ar·bitror+, 1 [BA-, VA-], _be a hearer_ or _spectator, think, suppose,
believe_, 4, 28; w. acc. and inf.

+Arbor+, -oris, F. [1 AL-, AR-], _tree_, 17.

+Ar·cessô+, 3, -îvî, -îtum [CAD-], _cause to come to; summon, send
for_, 20.

+Arduus+, -a, -um, adj. [1 AL-, AR-, strengthened to ARDH-],
_steep_, 33.

+Ariês+, -etis, M., _battering-ram_, 32.

+Arma+, -ôrum, N. [AR-], _things adapted; arms, weapons_, 3, 4, 9, 13,
etc.

+Armâtûra+, -ae, F. [AR-], _arming; equipment_, 10, 24.

+Armô+, 1 [AR-], _furnish with arms; arm, equip_, 4, 27.

+A·scendô (adsc-)+, 3, -dî, -scênsum [SCAND-], _mount up, climb_, 27.

+A·scênsus (adsc-)+, -ûs, M. [SCAND-], _ascending; ascent, way up_, 33.

+At+, conj., _but, on the other hand_, 23, 27.

+At·que+ (before vowels and consonants), +âc+ (before consonants only),
_and also, and especially, and_, 3, 5, 6, etc.; _as_, 6; _than_, 19.
  Cf. et and -que.

+Atrebatês+, -um, M., _Belgian people in the region of modern Arras_, 4,
16, 23.

+At·tingô (adt-)+, 3, -tigî, -tâctum, [TAG-], _touch against; approach,
reach_, 32; _border upon_, 15, 34.

+Auctôritâs+, -âtis, F. [AVG-], _power, standing, influence_, 4, 14, 15.

+Audâc·ter+, adv. [1 AV-], _boldly_, 10, 26.

+Audeô+, 2, ausus [1 AV-], _venture, dare_, 8, 17, 19, 27; w.
complementary infin.

+Audiô+, 4 [2 AV-], _listen to; hear, hear about_, 12, 31, w. acc.; 12,
w. acc. and infin.

+Aulercî+, -ôrum, M., _tribe in Bretagne and Normandy_, 34.

+Aurunculêius+, -î, M., _L. A. Cotta, lieutenant of Cæsar_, 11.

+Au·t+, conj. [2 TA-], _or_ (excluding the other), 30, 33; aut ... aut,
_either ... or_, 25.

+Au·tem+, postpositive conj. [2 TA-], _but, on the other hand_, 9;
_moreover_, 19.

+Auxilium+, -î, N. [AVG-], _aid, support, assistance_, 10, 24, 29; pl.
_auxiliary forces_, 14.
  Cf. subsidium.

+Â·vertô+, 3, -tî, -sum [VERT-], _turn away from_.
  Aversî, see note, 26.

+Axona+, -ae, F., _river in country of the Belgæ_, 5, 9.


B.

+Baculus+, -î, M., P. Sextius B., _centurion_, 25.

+Baleâris+, -e, adj., _Balearic, of the Balearic Islands_, 7.

+Barbarus+, -a, -um, adj., _foreign, non-Roman_, 35.

+Belgae+, -ârum, M., _collective name of tribes living in the country
bounded by the Seine, Marne, Moselle, Rhine, and the ocean_, 1, 2, 3,
following.

+Bellovacî+, -ôrum, M., _strongest tribe of the Belgæ, north of the
Seine and on right bank of the Oise and Somme_, 4, 5, 10, 13, 14.

+Bellum+, -î, N. [DVA-, DVI-], _contest between two; war_, 4, 9, 14, 16,
29, 31, 35.

+Bibrax+, -ctis, F. (N.?), _town of the Remi_, 6.

+Boduôgnâtus+, -î, M., _leader of the Nervii_, 23.

+Bratuspantium+, -î, N., _chief town of the Bellovaci_, 13.

+Brevitâs+, -âtis, F., _shortness, brevity_, 20, 30.
  Cf. exiguitâs.

+Britannia+, -ae, F., _Britain_, 4, 14.


C.

+Cadâver+, -eris, N. [CAD-], _that which falls down dead; dead
body_, 27.

+Cadô+, 3, cecidî, câsum [CAD-], _fall_, 27.

+Caeroesî+, -ôrum, M., _German tribe in Belgian Gaul_, 4.

+Caesar+, -aris, M., _Gaius Julius Cæsar, conqueror of Gaul and author
of the Commentaries_, 1, 2, 5, etc.

+Calamitâs+, -âtis, F. [SCAL-], _injury, disaster_, 14, 28.

+Caletî+, -ôrum (-ês, -um), M., _tribe in Normandy, on the Seine_, 4.

+Câlô+, -ônis, M., _groom, soldier's servant_, 24, 26, 27.

+Captîvus+, -a, -um, adj. [CAP-], _taken prisoner; captive_, 16, 17.

+Caput+, -itis, N. [CAP-], _head; individual, person_, 33.

+Carnûtês+, -um, M., _important Gallic tribe between the Loire and Seine
rivers_, 35.

+Castellum+, -î, N. dim. [SCAD-, CAD-], _redoubt, stronghold_, 8, 9, 29,
30, 33.

+Castra+, -ôrum, N. [SCAD-, CAD-], _camp_, 2, 5, 6, etc.

+Câsus+, -ûs, M. [CAD-], _falling; happening; chance_, 21;
_misfortune_, 31.

+Causa+, -ae, F. [CAV-], _cause, reason_, 1, 7, 10, 11; causâ, used like
prep. post-positive, _for the sake of, for the purpose of_, 10, 15, 17,
20, 21, 24.

+Cêdô+, 3, cessî, cessum [CAD-], _go; fall back; give way, retreat_, 19.

+Celeritâs+, -âtis, F. [CEL-], _swiftness, quickness_, 12, 19, 20,
26, 31.

+Celer·iter+, adv. [CEL-], _swiftly, quickly, promptly_, 3, 12, 23, 33.

+Cêlô+, 1 [2 CAL-, SCAL-], _hide, conceal_, 32, 33.

+Centum+, num. adj. indeclin. [CEN-], _hundred_, 4.

+Centuriô+, -ônis, M. [CEN-], _commander of a century, centurion,
captain_, 17, 25.

+Certus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 CER-, CRE-], _determined; definite_, 11;
_certain, regular_, 22; certiôrem facere, _inform_, 1, 2, 10, 34; w.
acc. and infin.

+Cêterî+, -ôrum, pl. adj. [CA-, CI-], _the others, rest_, 3.
  Cf. reliquî.

+Cîmbrî+, -ôrum, M., _German tribe which invaded Gaul and the Province
in the second century_, 4, 29.

+Circi·ter+, adv. [CVR-, CIR-; 1 I-], _going in a circle; about, not far
from_, 2, 8, 13, 18, 32.

+Circu·itus+, -ûs, M. [CVR-, CIR-; 1 I-], _going in a circle;
circumference_, 29, 30.

+Circum-+, prep. w. acc. [CVR-, CIR-], _around, about_; here only in
composition.

+Circum·iciô+, 3, -iêcî, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _throw around; place
around_, 6.

+Circum·mûniô+, 4, [2 MV-], _wall up around; blockade_, 30.

+Circum·veniô+, 4, -vênî, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come around;
surround, outflank_, 8, 10, 23, 24, 26.

+Cis+, prep. w. acc. [CA-, CI-], _on this side, this side of_, 3.

+Citerior+, -us, -ôris, adj. [CA-, CI-], _more on this side; hither,
nearer_, 1, 2.

+Citrâ+, prep. w. acc. [CA-, CI-], _on this side, this side of_, 29.
  Cf. cis.

+Cîvitâs+, -âtis, F., _citizenship; community_, 3, 4, 5, etc.

+Clâmor+, -ôris, M. [1 CAL-], _loud call; shouting_, 11, 24.

+Claudô+, 3, -sî, -sum, _shut, close_, 33; _close, bring up_, 19.

+Clê·mentia+, -ae, F. [CLÎ-; 1 MAN-, MEN-], _indulgent disposition;
gentleness, mildness_, 14, 31.

+Co·acervô+, 1 [1 AC-], _heap up_, 27.

+Co·epî+, -isse, -ptus (defective verb, with tenses from present stem
lacking) [AP-, OP-], _have begun, began_, 5, 6, 10, 12, 13, 19, 23, 20.

+Cô·gnôscô+, 3, -gnôvî, -gnitum [GNA-, GNO-], _understand thoroughly;
perceive, learn, ascertain_, 2, 5, 11, 17, w. acc. and inf.; 4, 26, w.
indir. question; plperf. _knew_, 10.

+Cô·gô+, 3, -êgî, -âctum [AG-], _drive together, compel; gather, rally_,
2, 5.
  Cf. condûcô.

+Co·hors+, -hortis, F., _multitude enclosed; cohort_, 5, 25.

+Co·hortâtiô+, -ônis, F., _cheering on, urging, encouraging, appeal
to_, 25.

+Co·hortor+, 1, _cheer on, urge, call upon_, 5, 20, 21, 25, w. acc.; 21
foll. by clause w. ut.

+Collis+, -is, M., _hill_, 8, 18, 19, 22.

+Com·meâtus (conm-)+, -ûs, M., _going to and fro; train of supplies,
provisions_, 5, 9.

+Com·{e}s+, -itis, M., _comrade_.

+Com·memorô (conm-)+, 1 [1 SMAR-, MAR-], _keep in mind; mention,
relate_, 28.

+Com·mittô (conm-)+, 3, -mîsî, mîssum [MIT-], _cause to go together;
join_, 19, 21.

+Com·modê (conm-)+, adv. [2 MA-, MAD-], _duly, aptly; easily,
advantageously_, 20.

+Com·moveô (conm-)+, 2, -môvî, -môtum [1 MV-, MOV-], _move violently;
startle, alarm, make anxious_, 2, 31.

+Com·mûnis (conm-)+, -e, adj. [2 MV-], _serving together; common,
general_, 4, 5.

+Com·mûtâtiô (conm-)+, -ônis, F. [1 MV-, MOV-], _change_, 27.

+Com·parô (conp-)+, 1 [2 PAR-, POR-], _bring_ or _put together; get
ready, provide, procure_, 2, 12.

+Com·pellô (conp-)+, 3, -pulî, -pulsum [PAL-, PEL-], _drive together,
gather; drive in a body, rout_, 23.

+Com·pleô (conp-)+, 2, -êvî, -êtum [PLE-, PLO-], _fill completely;
fill_, 24.

+Com·plûrês (conp-)+, -a (-ia), gen. -ium, adj. [PLE-, PLO-, PLV-],
_several together, a large number_, 17.

+Con-+, for +scom-+ = +cum+ [SEC-], _with, together_; in composition,
denoting completeness or union; sometimes intensive.

+Con·cîdô+, 3, -cîdî, -cîsum [2 SAC-, SEC-, SCÎD-], _cut up entirely;
cut to pieces, destroy_, 11.

+Con·cilium+, -î, N. [1 CAL-], _that which is called together; meeting,
assembly_, 4, 10.

+Con·currô+, 3, -currî or -cucurrî, -cursum [CEL-, CER-], _run together;
hurry, rally, gather_, 20, 33.

+Con·diciô+, -ônis, F., [DÎC-, DIC-], _talking together; agreement,
stipulation, terms_, 15, 32.

+Condrûsî+, -ôrum, M., _Belgic tribe on the Meuse_, 4.

+Con·dûcô+, 3, -dûxî, -ductum [DVC-], _lead together; collect, muster_,
2; _hire_, 1.

+Côn·ferô+, -ferre, -tulî, -lâtum [1 FER-], _bring_ or _bear together;
gather, collect_, 15, 25, 29; with reflex. pronoun, _betake one's self,
go_, 13.

+Côn·fertus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of côn·ferciô), _pressed together;
compact, in close array_, 23; _crowded together_, 25.

+Côn·ficiô+, 3, -fêcî, -fectum [FAC-], _make completely; perform,
accomplish_, 12; _raise, put in the field_, 4; _exhaust, wear out_, 23,
25, 27.

+Côn·fîdô+, 3, -fîsus sum [1 FID-, FÎD-] _trust entirely; believe, trust
firmly_, 30, w. acc. and infin.

+Côn·fîrmô+, 1 [2 FER-], _make firm; give assurance, pledge one's self_,
15, w. acc. and infin.; _encourage, reassure_, 19; _confirm_, 11.

+Côn·flîgô+, 3, -xî, -ctum [FLAG-, FLIG-], _strike_ or _dash together;
contend, fight_, 5; w. cum and abl.

+Con·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _step together; meet, have an
engagement with, fight_, 23.
  Cf. cônflîgô, pûgnô.

+Côn·iciô+, 3, -iêcî, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _throw together; hurl_, 6,
27; _drive, rout_, 23; _place hastily_, 16, 28.
  Cf. compellô.

+Con·iungô+, 3, -iûnxî, -iûnctum [IV-, IVG-], _draw together, join_, 3,
4, 26.

+Con·iûrô+, 1 [IV-, IVG-], _swear together; make a sworn agreement,
conspire_, 1, 3.

+Con·locô (coll-)+, 1, _place, station, set_, 8, 19, 22, 29, 30.

+Cônor+, 1, _undertake, attempt_, 9, 10, 12, 23.

+Côn·sanguineus+, -a, -um, adj., _possessing the same blood;
kindred_, 3.

+Côn·scrîbô+, 3, -psi, -ptum [SCARP-], _write together_ (in a list);
_enroll, enlist_, 2, 8, 19.

+Côn·sênsus+, -ûs, M. [SENT-], _agreement, harmony, concerted action_,
28, 29.

+Côn·sentiô+, 4, -sênsî, -sênsum [SENT-], _feel with_, 3; _join hands
(with), make common cause with_, 3; w. cum and abl.

+Côn-sequor+, 3, -secûtus [SEC-], _follow thoroughly; attain,
obtain_, 1.

+Côn·servô+, 1 [SAL-, SER-], _keep thoroughly; preserve, save, spare_,
12, 15, 28, 31, 32.

+Côn·sîdô+, 3, -sêdî, -sessum [SED-, SID-], _sit down together; settle,
take position_, 4, 16.

+Côn·silium+, -î, N., _consultation; design, plan of action_, 9, 14, 33;
_advice, suggestion_, 17.

+Côn·similis+, -e, adj., [2 SA-, SIM-], _altogether like, quite
similar_, 11; w. dat.

+Côn·sistô+, 3, -stitî, -- [STA-], _make stand; take position, stand_,
6, 23, 26; _make a stand, rally_, 11, 17, 21; _depend upon, be based
on_, 33.

+Côn·spectus+, -ûs, M. [SPEC-], _view, sight_, 25.

+Côn·spiciô+, 3, -spêxî, -spectum [SPEC-], _look at with attention;
behold, catch sight of, see_, 21, 26, w. acc.; 24, w. acc. and infin.

+Côn·spicor+, 1 [SPEC-], _get a sight of, espy, observe_, 26, 27.
  Cf. cônspiciô.

+Côn·stanter+, adv. [STA-], _standing firm; uniformly_, 2.

+Côn·stituô+, 3, -uî, -ûtum [STA-], _place together; determine,
appoint_, fix, 11; _set up, place_, 12, 30; _station_, 8, 19; _decide_,
10, w. acc. and infin.
  Cf. statuô.

+Côn·suêscô+, 3, -suêvî, -suêtum [SOVO-, SVO-], _accustom; become
accustomed_; pf. _be accustomed_ (= solêre), 14, 31.

+Côn·suêtûdô+, -inis, F. [SOVO-, SVO-], _custom, habit_, 17, 19, 32.
  Cf. môs.

+Con·temptus+, -ûs, M. [TEM-], _scorn, contempt_, 30.

+Con·tendô+, 3, -dî, -ntum [1 TA-, TEN-], _strain with all one's might;
march, push on, hasten_, 7, 9, 10, 12, 19, 23, 24; _struggle, contend_,
9, 13, 30.

+Con·tineô+, 2, -uî, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _hold_ or _keep together;
restrain, hold back_, 11; _keep_, 11, 18, 30.

+Con·trâ+, adv. [SEC-], _against, on the other hand_, 17; as prep., w.
acc., 1, 3, 13, 33.

+Con·trârius+, -a, -um, adj. [SEC-], _situated over against, opposite_,
18; w. dat.

+Con·tumêlia+, -ae, F. [TEM-], _great swelling; disgrace, insult_, 14.

+Con·vêniô+, 4, -vênî, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come together, meet_,
5, 10, 12; impersonal, _be agreed upon_, 19.

+Convertô+, 3, -tî, -sum [VERT-], _wholly turn; turn around, turn,
direct_, 26.

+Con·vocô+, 1 [VOC-], _call together, summon_, 10.

+C·ôpia+, -ae, F. [AP-, OP-], _ability; ample supply, supply_, 2; pl.,
_resources, supplies_, 10; _forces, troops_, 5, 7, 8, etc.

+Cornû+, -ûs, N. [CAR-], _horn; wing of an army_, 23, 25.

+Corpus+, -oris, N. [1 CER-, CRE-], _what is made; body_, 30; _corpse_,
10, 27.

+Cortex+, -icis, M. and F. [CAR-], _part that splits off; bark_, 33.

+Cotî·diê+, adv. [CA-; DIV-, DI-], _on every day; daily, regularly_, 8.

+Cotta+, -ae, M., _L. Arunculeius, one of Cæsar's lieutenants_, 11.

+Crassus+, -î, M., _P. Licinius, one of Cæsar's lieutenants_, 34.

+Crêber+, -bra, -brum, adj. [1 CER-, CRE-], _made to increase; thick,
numerous, frequent_, 1, 17, 30.

+Crêdô+, 3, -didî, -ditum [CRAT-; 2 DA-], _put trust in; believe_, 33,
w. acc. and infin.
  Cf. cônfîdô.

+Crês+, -êtis, M., _Cretan_, 7.

+Cruciâtus+, -ûs, M. [CVR-, CIR-], _torture_, 31.

+Cum+, prep. w. abl. [SEC-], _with, in company with, together with_, 3,
10, 13, etc.; _at same time with_, 5, 7, 16; _with, provided with_,
11, 33.

+Cum+, conj. [CA-, CI-], temporal, _when_, 1, 4, 6, 8, following; cum
prîmum, _as soon as_, 2; causal, _as, since_, 11, 17, 22, etc.;
concessive, _although, while_, 29; cum ... tum, _both ... and_, 4.

+C·ûnctus+, -a, -um, adj. [IV-, IVG-], _all together; all, entire_, 29.

+Cupiô+, 3, -îvî, -îtum, _desire eagerly, be eager_, 25.

+Curiosolitês+, -um, M. (acc. -ês, âs), _people of Armoric Gaul_, 34.

+Cursus+, -ûs, M. [CEL-, CER-], _running, speed_, 23, 26.

+Custôdia+, -ae, F. [SCV-, CV-], _guard-keeping; guard, protection_, 29.


D.

+Dê+, prep. w. abl., _from; down from_, 32; of time, _in, about_, 7;
_for, on account of_, 7; _for, about, concerning_, 2, 4, 6, etc.

+Dê·beô+ [for dehibeô], 2, -uî, -itum [HAB-], _have from_; impersonal,
_owe, ought_, 27, 33.

+Decem+, num. adj. indecl. [DEC-], _ten_, 4.

+Dê·cernô+, 3, -crêvî, -crêtum [2 CER-, CRE-], _decide; decide upon,
decree_, 35.

+Dê·certô+, 1 [2 CER-], _fight a decisive battle_, 10.
  Cf. conflîgô, congredior, dîmicô, pûgnô.

+Decimus+, -a, -um, adj. [DEC-], _tenth_, 21, 23, 25, 26.

+Dê·clîvis+, -e, adj. [CLÎ-], _inclining down-hill, sloping_, 18.

+Decumânus (deci-)+, -a, -um, adj. [DEC-], _of the tenth cohort_, in the
phrase, decumâna porta, _rear gate_, 24, main entrance to a Roman camp.

+Dê·currô+, 3, -cucurrî or -currî, -cursum [CEL-, CER-], _run down_,
19, 21.

+Dê·ditîcius+, -a, -um, adj. [1 DA-], _one who has surrendered_; as
noun, M., _prisoner of war_, 17; _subjects_, 32.

+Dê·ditiô+, -ônis, F. [1 DA-], _giving one's self up; surrender_, 12,
13, 32, 33.

+Dê·dô+, 3, -didî, -ditum [1 DA-], _give up_ or _away; surrender_, 15,
28, 32.

+Dê·dûcô+, 3, -xî, -ductum [DVC-], _lead away, bring off_, 2, 33, 35;
_bring (to)_, 10, 31.
  Cf. redigô.

+Dê·fendô+, 3, -dî, -fênsum [FEN-, FEND-], _thrust away; repel_, 29;
_defend_, 10, 12, 31, 33.

+Dê·fênsiô+, -ônis, F. [FEN-, FEND-], _protection, defence_, 7.

+Dê·fênsor+, -ôris, M. [FEN-, FEND-], _defender_, 6, 12.

+Dê·ferô+, -ferre, -tulî, -lâtum [1 FER-], _bear_ or _bring away; bear,
report_, 17, 19; _bestow_, 4; w. ad and acc.

+Dê·ficiô+, 3, -fêcî, -fectum [FAC-], _make from; give out, fail_, 10;
_revolt (from), forsake, desert_, 14; w. ab and abl.

+Dê·iciô+, 3, -iêcî, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _hurl down; drive away,
dislodge_, 27.

+Dê·iectus+, -ûs, M. [IA-, IAC-], _slope, declivity_, 8, 22.
  Cf. dêclîvis, adclîvis.

+De·inde+, adv. [2 I-], _from here; thereupon, then, in the next
place_, 1.

+Dê·leô+, 2, -êvî, -êtum [LI-], _wipe out, destroy_, 27.

+Dê·ligô+, 3, -lêgî, -lêctum [1 LEG-, LIG-], _choose out; choose,
select_, 17, 18, 29.
  Cf. êlîgô.

+Dê·mônstrô+, 1 [1 MAN-, MEN-], _point out, explain, mention_, 1, 9, 22;
w. acc. and infin., 17.

+Dênique+, adv., _and thereupon, finally; at any rate, at least_, 33.

+Dênsus+, -a, -um, adj., _thick, dense, close_, 22.

+Dê·pônô+, 3, -posuî, -positum [1 SA-, SI-], _put aside_ or _down; lay
aside, place in safety_, 29.

+Dê·populor+, 1 [SCAL-, SPOL-], _lay waste, ravage_, 7.

+Dê·precor+, 1 [PREC-], _avert by praying; petition against, pray to be
spared_, 31.

+Dê·serô+, 3, -uî, -tum [1 SER-, SVAR-], _undo, sever connection with;
abandon, desert_, 25, 29.

+Dê·sistô+, 3, -stitî, -- [STA-], _remove from; cease, stop_, 11.

+Dê·spectus+, -ûs, M. [SPEC-], _looking down upon; opportunity for
distant views, prospect_, 29.

+Dê·spêrô+, 1 [SPA-, PA-], _give up hope; despair of_, 24.

+Dê·spoliô+, 1 [SCAL-, SPOL-], _rob, deprive_, 31; w. acc. and abl.

+Dê·sum+, -esse, -fuî [ES-], _be away; be lacking, fail_, 21.
  Cf. dêficiô.

+Dê·terreô+, 2, -uî, -itum [TER-, TERS-], _frighten from; prevent,
deter_, 3.

+Dê·trahô+, 3, -xî, -ctum, _drag from; take from, remove_, 25.

+Dê·trûdô+, 3, -sî, -sum, _thrust away; remove_, 21.
  Cf. dêtrahô.

+Dê·veniô+, 4, -vênî, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come down into; come
to, reach_, 21; w. prep. and acc.
  Cf. adpropînquô.

+Dexter+, -tra, -trum, adj, _right, on the right hand_, 23, 25.

(+Diciô+), -ônis, F., no nom. [DIC-, DÎC-], _sway, control_, 34.

+Dîcô+, 3, -xî, -ctum [DÎC-, DIC-], _point out by speaking; say, state,
mention_, 1, 3, 4, etc.; w. acc. and infin.

+Diês+, -êî, M. and F. [DIV-, DI-], _day_, 2, 5, 6, etc.

+Dif·ficilis (disf-)+, -e, adj. [FAC-], _not to be done; difficult,
hard_, 27.

+Dif·ficultâs (disf-)+, -âtis, F. [FAC-], _difficulty, strait,
trouble_, 20.

+Dî·ligen·ter+, adv. [1 LEG-, LIG-], _attentively, scrupulously, with
painstaking_, 5, 28.

+Dî·mêtior+, 4, -mênsus [1 MA-, MAN-], _measure off; stake off, lay out,
survey_, 19.

+Dî·micô+, 1, _move rapidly back and forth; fight, contend_, 21.
  Cf. cônfligô, congredior, contendô.

+Dî·mittô+, 3, -mîsî, mîssum [MIT-], _send out in different directions,
despatch_, 5, 14, 21.

+Dî·ripiô+, 3, -uî, -reptum [RAP-, RVP-], _tear in pieces; sack,
plunder_, 17.

+Dis·cêdô+, 3, -cessî, -cessum [CAD-], _go apart; go away, depart_, 7,
11, 20.

+Dis·cessus+, -ûs, M. [CAD-], _departure, withdrawal_, 14.

+Dis·sipô+, 1, _scatter, break up_, 24.

+Dis·tineô+, 2, -uî, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _keep apart; prevent union
of, separate_, 5.

+Diû+, adv. [DIV-, DI-], _by day; for a long time, long_; compar.
diûtius, 1, 6, 10.

+Dî·versus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of dîvertô) [VERT-], _turned away from;
facing in different directions_, 22; _different_, 23; _separated_, 24.

+Dîvînus+, -a, -um, adj. [DIV-, DI-], _of the gods, divine_, 31.

+Divitiacus+, -î, M., _leader of the Ædui, brother of Dumnorix_, 5, 10,
14, 15; _chieftain of the Suessiones_, 4.

+Dô+, dare, dedî, datum [1 DA-], _give_, 2, 3, 20, 21, 35; inter sê,
_exchange_, 1.

+Doceô+, 2, -uî, -ctum [DIC-, DAC- (DOC-)], _show, teach, explain_,
5, 20.

+Domesticus+, -a, -um, adj. [DOM-], _of home, native, own_, 10.

+Domi·cilium+, -î, N. [DOM-; 2 CAL-, SCAL-], _dwelling-place_, 29.

+Dominor+, 1, _lord it, be master_, 31.

+Domus+, -ûs, F. [DOM-], _home_, 10, 11, 24, 29.

+Du·bitô+, 1 [DVA-; BA-], _go to and fro; doubt, hesitate_, 2, 23.

+Du·centî+, -ae, -a, num. adj. [DVA-, DVI-; CEN-], _two hundred_,
18, 29.

+Dûcô+, 3, -xî, ductum [DVC-], _lead, conduct_, 8, 12, 13, 19.

+Dum+ [for dium], adv. [DIV-, DI-], _while_.

+Duo+, -ae, -o, num. adj. [DVA-, DVI-], _two_, 2, 7, 8, 9, etc.

+Duo·decimus+, -a, -um, adj. [DVA-, DVI-; DEC-], _twelfth_, 23, 25.

+Duo·dê·vîgintî+, num. adj. indecl. [DVA-, DVI-], _eighteen_, 5.

+Du·plex+, -icis, adj. [DVA-; PARC-, PLEC-], _twofold, double_, 29.

+Dux+, -cis, M. [DVC-], _leader_, 23; _guide_, 7.


E.

+Ê+ or +Ex+, prep. w. abl., _from, out of_, 3, 6, 13, etc.; _after_, 6;
_on_, 8; _in consequence of_, 35.

+Eburônês+, -um, M., _Belgian people near the Rhine_, 4.

+Ê·ditus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of êdô) [1 DA-], _set forth; elevated,
rising_, 8.

+Ê·dûcô+, 3, -xî, -ductum [DVC-], _lead out, lead forth_, 8.

+Ef·ficiô (ecf-)+, 3, -fêcî, -fectum [FAC-], _work out; bring about,
effect_, 5, 17; w. ut and subj.

+Ê·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go out; sally forth_, 24; _depart
from, go forth_, 11, 13.

+Ê·gregiê+, adv., _out of the flock; remarkably, excellently_, 29.

+Ê·ligô+, 3, -lêgî, -lêctum [1 LEG-, LIG-], _choose out; pick from,
choose_, 4.
  Cf. dêligo.

+Ê·mittô+, 3, -mîsî, -mîssum [MIT-], _send out; hurl, let fly_, 23.

+Emô+, 3, êmî, êmptum [EM-], _take in exchange; buy_, 33.

+Ê·nâscor+, 3, -nâtus [GEN-, GN-, GNA-], _grow out, spring up; sprout
forth_, 17.

+Enim+, co-ord. conj., post-positive, _for, in fact_, 17.
  Cf. nam.

+Eô+, adv. (old dat. or abl. N. of is) [2 I-], _there, thither_, 3, 5,
25, 33.

+Equ{e}s+, -itis, M., [2 AC-], _horseman, cavalry-man, knight_, 9, 18,
19, 24, 26, 27.

+Equester+, -tris, -tre, adj. [2 AC-], _of horsemen, cavalry_, 8, 9.

+Equitâtus+, -ûs, M. [2 AC-], _riding; cavalry_, 10, 11, 17, 19.

+Ergô+, _because of; therefore_.

+Ê·ruptiô+, -ônis, F. [RAP-, RVP-], _bursting forth; sally_, 33.

+Esuviî+, -ôrum, M., _people in Normandy_, 34.

+Et+, co-ord. conj. _and_, 1, 2, 3, etc.; et ... et, _both ... and_, 3,
4, 5, etc.

+Et·iam+, adv. and conj. _and now; also_, 1, 4, 14, 16, 17, 21; _even,
still_, 4, 25, 27.

+Ê·ventus+, -ûs, M. [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _coming forth; outcome, issue,
result_, 22.

+Ex+, see +Ê+.

+Ex·agitô+, 1 [AG-], _disturb, harass_, 29.

+Ex·animô+, 1 [AN-], _deprive of life; make breathless_, 23.

+Ex·audiô+, 4 [2 AV-], _hear distinctly; hear from a distance_, 11.

+Ex·cêdô+, 3, -cessî, -cessum [CAD-], _go out; withdraw, go away_, 25.

+Ex·cursiô+, -ônis, F. [CEL-, CER-], _running forth; sally_, 30.
  Cf. êruptiô.

+Ex·eô+, -îre, -iî, -itum [1 I-], _go out; withdraw_, 33.
  Cf. excêdô.

+Ex·ercitô+, 1 [ARC-] _(drive out of the enclosure), keep busy; train,
drill_, 20.

+Ex·ercitus+, -ûs, M. [ARC-], _trained body of men; army_, 1, 2, 5, etc.

+Ex·iguitâs+, -âtis, F., _scantiness, shortness_, 21, 33.

+Ex·imius+, -a, -um [EM-], _taken out from; eminent, excellent,
high_, 8.

+Ex·istîmô+, 1, _judge, value; judge, think, believe_, 2, 15, 17, 31; w.
acc. and infin.

+Ex·pedîtus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of expediô) [PED-], _unencumbered, in
light marching order_, 19.

+Ex·pellô+, 3, -pulî, -pulsum [PAL-, PEL-], _drive out, banish_, 4.

+Ex·perior+, 4, -pertus [1 PAR-, PER-], _try thoroughly; test, try_, 16.

+Ex·plôrâtor+, -ôris, M. [PLV- (PLOV-)], _searcher out; scout, spy_, 5,
11, 17.
  Cf. speculâtor.

+Ex·plôrô+, 1 [PLV- (PLOV-)], _search out; try to find out,
reconnoitre_, 4.

+Ex·pûgnô+, 1 [PAC-, PAG-, PVG-], _take by storm; take_, 9, 10, 12.

+Ex-spectô+, 1 [SPEC-], _look out for greatly; wait for, await_, 9,
16, 20.

+Ex·struô+, 3, -strûxî, -strûctum [STRV-], _pile up thoroughly; erect,
construct_, 30.

+Extrêmus+, -a, -um, adj., _furthest; most distant, extreme_, 5, 8, 25;
_last_, 11, 27, 33.


F.

+Facile+, adv. [FAC-], _easily_, 1, 6, 17, 18, 19, 25.

+Facilis+, -e, adj. [FAC-], _able to be done; easy_, 27.

+Faciô+, 3, fêcî, factum; pass. fîô, f{i}erî, factus [FAC-], _do,
perform_, 3, 5, 6, etc.; _make_, 1, 2, 6, etc.; _cause, bring about_,
4, 11.
  See certus.

+Facultâs+, -âtis, F. [FAC-], _power of doing; opportunity_; pl.
_resources, facilities_, 1.

+Fallô+, 3, fefellî, falsum, _cause to stumble; deceive_, 10.

+Fastîgâtus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of fastîgô), _brought to a point;
sloping_, 8.
  Cf. adclîvis, dêclîvis.

+Ferâx+, -âcis, adj. [1 FER-], _apt to bear; fertile_, 4.

+Ferê+, adv. [2 FER-, FRE-], _nearly, almost_, 23, 25, 31.

+Ferô+, ferre, tulî, lâtum [1 FER-], _bear, bring, carry_, 10, 26, 28;
_bear, endure_, 1, w. acc. and infin.; _rush_ (in pass.), 24.

+Fertilitâs+, -âtis, F. [1 FER-], _fruitfulness, fertility_, 4.

+Ferus+, -a, -um, adj., _wild, fierce, ferocious_, 4, 15.

+Fidês+, fidê (rare), F. [1 FID-], _trust, confidence; protection_, 3,
13, 14, 15.

+Fîlius+, -î, M., _son_, 13.

+Fînis+, -is, M. [2 FID-], _dividing thing; end, limit_, 6, 19; pl.
_land, territory_, 2, 4, 5, etc.

+Fînitimus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 FID-], _bordering upon; neighboring_, 2;
pl. _neighbors_, 4, 16, 17, 28, 29, 31.

+Fîô+, f{i}erî, _factus, be made, become_, see +faciô+.

+Flûmen+, -inis, N., _that which flows; river_, 5, 9, 10, etc.

+Fôrs+, fôrte, nom. and abl. only, F. [1 FER-], _that which brings;
chance_, 21.

+Fôrte+, adv., abl. of fôrs, _by chance; perhaps_, 31.

+Fortis+, -e, adj. [2 FER-], _courageous, brave, stout-hearted_, 25, 33.

+Fort·iter+, adv. [2 FER-], _bravely, gallantly_, 11, 21, 26.

+Fôrtûna+, -ae, F. [1 FER-], _fortune_, 16, 22, 31.

+Fossa+, -ae, F., _thing dug; ditch_, 5, 8, 12, 32.

+Frâter+, -tris, M., _brother_, 3.

+Fremitus+, -ûs, M., _dull roar; din, noise_, 24.
  Cf. strepitus.

+Frôns+, -ntis, F. [FVR-, FERV-], _brow; front_, 8, 23, 25.

+Frûmentârius+, -a, -um, adj. [1 FVG-, FRVG-], _of grain_; w. res,
_grain supply_, 2, 10.

+Frûmentum+, -î, N. [1 FVG-, FRVG-], _thing eaten; corn, grain_, 3.

+Fuga+, -ae, F. [2 FVG-], _fleeing; flight, rout_, 11, 12, 23, 24,
26, 27.

+Fugiô+, 3, fûgî, -- [2 FVG-], _flee, fly_, 11, 24.

+Fûmus+, -î, M., _rushing thing; smoke_, 7.

+Funditor+, -ôris, M., _slinger_, 7, 10, 19, 24.

+Furor+, -ôris, M. [FVR-], _raging; blind passion, madness_, 3.


G.

+Galba+, -ae, M., _king of the Suessiones_, 4, 13.

+Galea+, -ae, F. [2 CAL-, SCAL-], _covering; helmet_, 21.

+Gallia+, -ae, F., _Gaul_, 1, 2, 3, 4, 35.

+Gallus+, -î, M., _a Gaul_, 1, 2, 4, 6, 12, 17, 24, 30.

+Gêns+, gentis, F., _what is begotten; race, tribe_, 28.

+Germânî+, -ôrum, M., _Germans_, 1, 3, 4.

+Gerô+, 3, gessî, gestum [GER-], _bear; carry on, go on with_, 9, 31,
35; pass., _be carried on, take place_, 2, 26; rês gestae, _operations,
campaigns_, 35.

+Gladius+, -î, M. [CEL-, CER-], _sword_, 23, 25.

+Grâtia+, -ae, F., _favor, popularity, influence_, 6.

+Gravis+, -e, adj., _heavy; severe, serious_, 25.


H.

+Habeô+, 2 [HAB-], _grasp; have, possess_, 1, 3, 4, 8, 29; with reflex
pronoun, _be_, 19.

+Hîbernâcula+, -ôrum, N. [HÎM-], _winter quarters_, 35.

+Hîbernus+, -a, -um, adj. [HÎM-], _belonging to winter_; hîberna
(castra), _winter quarters_, 1.

+Hî·c+, haec, hôc, demonstr. pron. [CA-, CI-], _this, this of mine_, 1,
2, 4, etc.; _he, she, it_, 3, 4, 9, etc.

+Hiemô+, 1 [HÎM-], _pass the winter_, 1.

+Homô+, -inis, M. [HAM-], _man, person_, 1, 4, 6, 15, 27, etc.

+Honôs (honor)+, -ôris, M., _honor, distinction_, 15.

+Hostis+, -is, M., _one who hurts; enemy_, 5, 7, 8, 9, etc.


I.

+Iaceô+, 2, -ui, -- [IA-, IAC-], _be thrown; lie_, 27.

+Iaciô+, 3, iêcî, iactum [IA-, IAC-], _hurl, throw_, 6, 32, 33; _throw
up, construct_, 12.

+Iam+, adv., _at this_ or _that time; now_, 19; neque iam, _and no
longer_, 5, 20, 25, 33.

+Ibî+, adv. [2 I-], _in that place, there_, 4, 5, 8, etc.

+Iccius+, -î, M., _Belgian of high rank_, 3, 6, 7.

+Î·dem+, eadem, idem, determ. pron. [2 I-; 3 DA-], _the very; same_, 3,
6, 7, 16, etc.

+Iden·t·idem+, adv. [2 I-], _very same; again and again_, 19.

+I·dôneus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-], _fit; suitable_, 8, 17.

+Îgnis+, -is, M. [AG-], _fire; camp-fire_, 7; _signal-fire, beacon_, 33.

+Ille+, -a, -ud, gen. illîus, demonstr. pron. [ANA-], _that; that one,
the former_, 9, 33; _latter_, 19.

+Illyricum+, -î, N., _coastland on eastern side of upper Adriatic_, 35.

+Im·pedîmentum (inp-)+, -î, N. [PED-], _thing entangling; hindrance_,
25; pl., _baggage_, 17, 24, 29; _baggage-train, pack-animals_, 17, 19,
24, 26.
  Cf. sarcina.

+Im·pediô (inp-)+, 4 [PED-], _get the feet in, entangle; hinder,
embarrass, make difficult_, 9, 10, 17, 20, 22, 23, 28.

+Im·pellô (inp-)+, 3, -pulî, -pulsum [PAL-, PEL-, PVL-], _drive on;
incite, influence_, 14.

+Im·perâtor (inp-)+, -ôris, M. [2 PAR-, POR-], _commander_ (in chief),
25, 26.

+Im·perâtum+, -î, N., _command_, 3, 35.

+Im·perium (inp-)+, -î, N. [2 PAR-, POR-], _command, order_, 1, 20, 22;
_chief command, authority_, 4, 23; _power, control_, 1, 3, 11.

+Im·perô (inp-)+, 1 [2 PAR-, POR-], _put a command upon; impose upon,
command_, 3, 21, 28, 32, 35; _direct, dictate_, 11, 33; w. dat. and
subjunctive w. ut.

+Im·petrô (inp-)+, 1 [POT-], _accomplish; obtain, succeed in obtaining a
request_, 12; w. ut and subjunctive.

+Im·petus (inp-)+, -ûs, M. [PET-], _onset, attack, charge_, 11, 19, 21,
24, 25; _fury, violence_, 6.

+Im·prô·vîsus (inp-)+, -a, -um, adj. [VID-], _not foreseen_; dê
imprôvîsô, _unexpectedly, without notice_, 3.

+In+, prep. w. acc. and abl. [ANA-], _into, to_, 2, 3, 5; _in_, 5, 8,
29, etc.; _in, within, on_, 1, 2, 8, etc.; _upon, over_, 5, 29, 30;
_among_, 25; _in the case of_, 32.

+In·cendô+, 3, -dî, -cênsum, _put fire in; set on fire_, 7.

+In·c{i}dô+, 3, -c{i}dî, -- [CAD-], _fall into; happen, occur_, 14.
  Cf. acc{i}dô, êveniô.

+In·cîdô+, 3, -cîdî, -cîsum [2 SAC-, SEC-, SCÎD-, CÎD-], _cut into,
notch_, 17.

+In·cipiô+, 3, -cêpî, -ceptum [CAP-], _take in hand; begin_, 2; w.
compl. infin.

+In·citô+, 1 [CI-], _set in rapid motion; urge on, hurry, hasten_, 26.
  Cf. impellô.

+In·colô+, 3, -uî, -- _inhabit, live in_, 4; _live, dwell_, 3, 35.

+In·crê·dibilis+, -e, adj. [CRAT-; 2 DA-], _not to be believed;
marvellous, incredible_, 19.

+In·crepitô+, 1, --, --, _make noise against; upbraid, taunt,
abuse_, 15, 30.

+In·cûsô+, 1 [CAV-], _make charges against, accuse, rebuke_, 15.

+Inde+, adv. [2 I-], _from that; then, next_, 19.

+In·dîgnitâs+, -âtis, F., _unworthiness; outrage, insult_, 14.

+In·dî·ligen·ter+, adv. [1 LEG-, LIG-], _carelessly, listlessly_, 33.

+In·dûcô+, 3, -xî, -ductum [DVC-], _lead into; draw on, cover_, 33.

+Ind·uô+, 3, -uî, -ûtum, _put into; put on_, 21.

+In·eô+, -îre, -îvî and -iî, -itum [1 I-], _go into; enter upon,
undertake_, 33; _begin_, 2, 35.

+In·ermis+, -e, adj. [AR-], _without armor; unarmed_, 27.

+Înferior+, -ius, adj. (compar. of înferus), _lower_, 25; _inferior_, 8.

+Înfimus+, -a, -um, adj. (superl. of above), _lowest; lowest part of,
bottom_, 18.

+În·ferô+, -ferre, -tulî, illâtum (inlatum) [1 FER-], _bring into; make
upon, wage_, 14, 29; _inspire in_, 25; _bring upon, cause, inflict_, 14,
32; _carry forward, advance_, 25, 26; _bring in, import_, 15; w. acc.,
or acc. and dat.

+În·flectô+, 3, -flêxî, -flexum, _bend, bend down_, 17.

+In·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go into, enter_, 4.

+In·imîcus+, -a, -um, adj. [AM-], _not friendly; hostile_, 31.
  Cf. hostis.

+In·îquitâs+, -âtis, F. [IC-, AIC-], _unevenness, inequality_, 22.

+In·îquus+, -a, -um, adj. [IC-, AIC-], _not equal; uneven, unfavorable_,
10, 23, 27, 33.

+In·itium+, -î, N. [1 I-], _entering upon; beginning_, 9; w. partit.
gen.

+In·iûria+, -ae, F. [IV-, IVG-], _thing done contrary to justice; wrong,
injury, violence_, 28, 32, 33.

+In·nîtor+, 3, -nîxus, _lean upon, prop one's self on_, 27.

+In·rîdeô (irr-)+, 2, -rîsî, -rîsum, _laugh in ridicule; laugh at,
mock_, 30.

+În·sequor+, 3, -secûtus [SEC-], _follow close upon; follow up, pursue_,
19, 23.

+În·sidiae+, -ârum, F. [SED-, SID-], _taking a position at; stratagem,
trap, snare_, 11.

+În·sîgne+, -is, N. [3 SAC-], _distinctive mark; sign, signal_, 20;
_ornament, crest_, 21.

+În·sistô+, 3, -stitî, -- [STA-], _set one's self on; take a stand
on_, 27; w. dat.

+În·star+, indecl., N., _image_; used as pred. adj., _like, in form of_,
17; w. gen.

+În·stô+, 1, -stitî, -statûrus [STA-], _stand upon; press forward_, 25.

+În·struô+, 3, -strûxî, -strûctum [STRV-], _build into; arrange, draw
up_, 8, 20, 22; _build, erect_, 30.

+Intel·legô (interl-)+, 3, -lêxî, -lêctum [1 LEG-], _choose between;
understand, be aware, know, find out_, 8, 10, 33; w. acc. and infin.;
14, w. indir. quest.

+Inter+, prep. w. acc. [ANA-], _in the midst; between_, 9, 17; _among_,
1, 4, 6, 15, 19, 24, 31.

+Inter·cêdô+, 3, -cessî, -cessum [CAD-], _go between; be between, move
between_, 17.

+Inter·cipiô+, 3, -cêpî, -ceptum [CAP-], _take between; intercept_, 27.

+Inter·eâ+, adv. [ANA-; 2 I-] _between these things; in the meantime,
meanwhile_.

+Inter·ficiô+, 3, -fêcî, -fectum [FAC-], _make to be between, break in
pieces; kill, put to death_, 10, 11, 23, 25, 31.
  Cf. concîdô, occîdô.

+Inter·iciô+, 3, -iêcî, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _hurl between; place_ or
_plant among_, 17; pass., _intervene_, 22.

+Inter·im+, adv. [ANA-; 2 I-], _in the meantime, meanwhile_, 9, 12,
19, 26.

+Interior+, -ius, adj., compar. of obsolete interus [ANA-], _inner,
interior of_, 2.

+Inter·mittô+, 3, -mîsî, -mîssum [MIT-], _make go apart; discontinue,
cease_, 25.

+Inter·neciô+, -ônis, F. [1 NEC-, NOC-], _complete destruction,
annihilation_, 28.

+Inter·scindô+, 3, -scidî, -scissum [2 SAC-, SEC-, SCÎD-], _separate
by splitting; cut down, hew away, demolish_, 9.

+Inter·sum+, -esse, -fuî [ES-], _be between; be the concern of,
concern_, 5; w. gen. of price.

+Inter·vâllum+, -î, N. [1 VEL-, VAL-], _space between stakes of a
palisade; distance, interval_, 23.
  Cf. spatium.

+In·texô+, 3, -uî, -xtum [TEC-, TAX-], _weave in; plait_, 33.

+Intrâ+, prep. w. acc. [ANA-], _on the inside; within_, 4, 18, 19.

+Intrô+, 1 [ANA-], _enter, penetrate_, 17.

+Intrô·dûcô+, 3, -xî, -ductum [DVC-], _lead in, bring in_, 5, 10.

+Intrô·mittô+, 3, -mîsî, -mîssum [MIT-], _cause to go within; let in,
admit_, 33.

+Intr·ôrsus+, adv. [VERT-], _towards the inside; into the interior,
within_, 18.

+In·ûsitâtus+, -a, -um, adj. [1 AV-], _unusual, strange_, 31.

+In·ûtilis+, -e, adj. [1 AV-], _useless; unserviceable, incapable_, 16;
w. ad and acc.

+In·veniô+, 4, -venî, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come upon; find,
learn_, 16; w. acc. and infin.
  Cf. côgnôscô.

+In·veterâscô+, 3, -âvî, -- [VET-], _become of long standing; gain a
permanent foothold_, 1.

+In·videô+, 2, -vîdî, -vîsum [VID-], _look towards; be jealous of,
envy_, 31.

+I·pse+, -a, -um (gen. ipsîus), intensive pron. [2 I-; 3 SA-], _person_
or _thing mentioned; self_, 3, 4, 5, etc.; sometimes conveniently
rendered _he, they (the latter)_, 2, 20, 29.

+Is+, ea, id, determ. pron. [2 I-], _person_ or _thing mentioned; he,
that, this_, 1, 2, 3, etc.; akin to talis, foll. by subj. clause, 9, 16.

+Ita+, adv. [2 I-], _in the way stated; so, thus_, 11, 33; w. ut, _in
the way that, just as, as_, 1.

+Îtalia+, -ae, F., _Italy_, 29, 35.

+Ita·que+, conj. [2 I-; CA-, CI-], _and so; therefore_, 7, 22.

+Item+, adv. [2 I-], _even so; so, likewise_, 1, 8, 13, 21, 23, 26.

+Iter+, itineris, N. [1 I-], _going; march, route, line of march, road_,
6, 11, 12, 16, 17, 29.

+Iubeô+, 2, iûssî, iûssum [IV-, IVG-], _order, command, bid_, 5, 11, 25,
28, 33, 35; w. acc. and infin.

+Iû·dicô+, 1 [IV-, IVG-; DIC-], _declare what is law; judge, suppose,
think_, 27.

+Iugum+, -î, N. [IV-, IVG-], _joining; ridge, chain of hills_, 24.

+Iûs+, iûris, N. [IV-, IVG-], _thing binding; constitution, law_, 3.

+Iûstitia+, -ae, F. [IV-, IVG-], _uprightness, justice, fairness_, 4.

+Iuvô+, 1, iûvî, iûtum [DIV-, DI-, DIAV-], _delight; help, assist_, 3.

+Iûxtâ+, adv. [IV-, IVG-], _closely joined; close by, near at hand_, 26.


L.

+L.+, _prænomen Lucius_, 11.

+Labiênus+, -î, M., _Titus Labienus, most eminent of Cæsar's
lieutenants_, 1, 11, 26.

+Lapis+, -idis, M., _stone_, 6.

+Lassitûdô+, -inis, F. [LAG-], _faintness, exhaustion_, 23.

+Lateô+, 2, -uî, --, _lie hidden; be concealed_, 19.

+Lâtitûdô+, -inis, F. [STER-, STRA-, STLA-], _breadth; width, expanse,
extent_, 7, 8, 12, 29; _lateral direction_, 17.

+Lâtus+, -a, -um, adj. [STER-, STRA-, STLA-], _extended; broad, wide_,
4, 27.

+Latus+, -eris, N. [PLAT-], _thing extending; side, flank_, 5, 8,
23, 25.

+Laxô+, 1 [LAG], _loose; change to open order, widen_, 25.

+Lêgâtiô+, -ônis, F. [3 LEG-], _embassy, legation_, 35.

+Lêgâtus+, -î, M. [3 LEG-], _envoy_, 6, 12, 15, 28, 31, 35;
_lieutenant_, 2, 5, 9, 11, 20.

+Legiô+, -ônis, F. [1 LEG-], _levying; largest military division,
consisting of 10 cohorts; legion_, 2, 8, 17, etc.

+Legiônârius+, -a, -um, adj. [1 LEG-], _belonging to a legion;
legionary_, 27.

+Lên·iter+, adv. [1 I-], _gently, moderately_, 8, 29.

+Levis+, -e, adj. [2 LEG-], _lightly moving; light_, 10, 24.

+Levitâs+, -âtis, F. [2 LEG-], _lightness; inconstancy, fickleness_, 1.

+Lêx+, lêgis, F. [3 LEG-], _thing read; written law, law_, 3.
  Cf. iûs.

+Lîberâl·iter+, adv. [LIB-; 1 I-], _generously, graciously_, 5.

+Lîberî+, -erôrum, M. [LIB-], _those who do as they desire, free
persons; children (of free parents)_, 5.

+Littera+, -ae, F. [LI-], _written character_; pl., _letter, letters;
despatch, despatches_, 1, 2, 35.

+Locus+, -î, M., _that placed or situated; place, point, position,
situation_, 2, 4, 5, etc.; _state, condition_, 26; pl., +loca+, -ôrum,
N., _region, section, tract_, 4, 19.

+Longê+, adv. [2 LEG-], _in length; far, at a distance_, 4, 5, 19,
20, 21.

+Longus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 LEG-], _long, lengthy_, 21.

+Loquor+, 3, locûtus, _speak, talk_, 31.

+Lûx+, lûcis, F., _that which shines; light, dawn, daylight_, 11.


M.

+Mâchinâtiô+, -ônis, F., _contrivance, engine, machine_, 30, 31.

+Magis+, adv. [MAC-, MAG-], _in a higher degree; more_, 22, 32.

+Magistrâtus+, -ûs, M. [MAC-, MAG-], _magistracy, ruler_, 3.

+Mâgnitûdô+, -inis, F. [MAC-, MAG-], _greatness, size, height_, 12,
27, 30.

+Mâgnus+, -a, -um, adj. [MAC-, MAG-], _increased; great_, 4, 5, 6, etc.

+Mâior+, -ius, adj., compar. of above, _greater_; mâior nâtû, _elder_,
13, 28.

+Male·ficium+, -î, N. [MAL-; FAC-], _evil-doing; outrage, hostile
act_, 28.
  Cf. iniûria, indîgnitâs.

+Man·dô+, 1 [1 MA-, MAN-; 2 DA-], _put into one's hands; give in charge,
enjoin, order_, 5; _entrust, consign_, 24; w. acc. and dat.

+Mani·pulus+, -î, M. [1 MA-, MAN-; PLE-, PLV-], _thing filling the hand;
(subdivision of a cohort), company, maniple_, 25.

+Mân·suêtûdô+, -inis, F. [1 MA-, MAN-; SOVO-, SVO-], _tameness;
gentleness, kindness_, 14, 31.
  Cf. clêmentia.

+Manus+, -ûs, F. [1 MA-, MAN-], _measuring thing; hand_, 13, 19, 30;
_band, force_, 2, 5.

+Maritimus (-umus)+, -a, -um, adj., _of the sea; on the coast,
maritime_, 34.

+Mâtûrô+, 1, make ripe; _hasten, make haste_, 5.
  Cf. contendô.

+Mâximê+, adv., superl. of magis, q.v.; _most, very_, 4.

+Medius+, -a, -um, adj., _in the middle; middle of_, 7.

+Memoria+, -ae, F. [1 SMAR-, MAR-], _faculty of remembering;
recollection, memory_, 4, 21.

+Menapiî+, -ôrum, M., _Gallic tribe between the Meuse and Scheld_, 4.

+Mercâtor+, -ôris, M. [2 SMAR-, MER-], _trader_, 15.

+Meritum+, -î, N. [2 SMAR-, MER-], _thing deserved; deserts, merit_, 32.

+Mîles+, -itis, M. [MÎL-], _one of the thousand; soldier_, 11, 20, 21,
etc.

+Mîlitâris+, -e, adj. [MÎL-], _of soldiers; pertaining to war,
military_, 4, 22.

+Mîlle+, pl. mîlia or mîllia, num. adj. [MÎL-], _large number
associated; thousand_, 4, 6, 7, etc.

+Minimê+, adv., superl. of minus, _least_, 33.

+Minor+, -us, adj. [2 MAN-, MI-], _smaller_; minus, N., as adv., _less_,
1, 7, 20; _not_ (= nôn), 9.

+Miser+, -era, -erum, adj. [MIS-], _wretched, miserable_, 28.

+Miseri·cordia+, -ae, F. [MIS-], _heart-pity; pity, compassion_, 28.

+Mittô+, 3, mîsî, mîssum [MIT-], _let go; send, despatch_, 2, 3, 5, etc.

+Môbilitâs+, -âtis, F. [1 MV-, MOV-], _ability to be moved, agility;
fickleness, inconstancy_, 1. Opp. to stabilitâs.
  Cf. levitâs.

+Modo+, adv. [2 MA-, MAD-], _in a measure; only, merely_, 17, 21.

+Modus+, -î, M. [2 MA-, MAD-], _measuring thing; manner, fashion_, 31.

+Moenia+, -ium, N. [2 MV-], _things that ward off; walls, city walls_,
6, 31.

+Molestê+, adv. [MAC-, MAG-], _in a troublesome manner_; molestê
ferre, _be annoyed or vexed_, 1; w. acc. and infin.

+Moneô+, 2 [1 MAN-, MEN-], _cause to think; direct_, 26; w. acc., foll.
by clause w. ut.

+Mora+, -ae, F. [1 SMAR-, MAR-], _stopping, delay_, 15.

+Morinî+, -ôrum, M., _tribe of Belgæ on Channel, near Calais_, 4.

+Moror+, 1 [1 SMAR-, MAR-], _linger, tarry, delay_, 7, 10, 11.

+Môs+, môris, M. [1 MA-, MAN-], _will; custom, manner_, 13, 15.
  Cf. cônsuêtûdô.

+Moveô+, 2, môvî, môtum [1 MV-, MOV-], _set in motion; move_, 2, 31.

+Mulier+, -eris, F. [MAL-], _woman, female_, 13, 16, 28.

+Multitûdô+, -inis, F., _large number, body_, 4, 5, 6, etc.; _quantity,
number_, 10, 32.

+Multus+, -a, -um, adj., _much_, pl. _many_, 11, 25, 29.

+Mûnîmentum+, -î, N. [2 MV-], _means of defence; fortification,
defence_, 17.

+Mûniô+, 4 [2 MV-], _wall; fortify, erect defences about, protect,
make_, (castra), 5, 12, 19, 20, 29.

+Mûnîtiô+, -ônis, F. [2 MV-], _fortifying; fortification, works_, 33.

+Mûrus+, -î, M. [2 MV-], _encircling thing; wall, city wall_, 6, 12, 13,
17, 29, 30, 32.
  Cf. moenia.


N.

+Nam+, co-ord. conj. [GNA-], _for_, 6, 14, 16, 19, 23, 30; as enclitic,
quisnam, _really, pray_, 30.
  Cf. the postpositive enim.

+Nâscor+, 3, nâtus [GEN-, GNA-], _be born; begin, arise_, 18.

+Nâtiô+, -ônis, F. [GEN-, GNA-], _birth; race, people_, 35.
  Cf. populus, gêns.

+Nâtûra+, -ae, F. [GEN-, GNA-], _birth; nature, character_, 8, 15, 18,
22, 29.

(+Nâtus+, -ûs), only abl. sing., M. [GEN-, GNA-], _birth_, 13, 28.

+Nâvô+, 1 [GNA-, GNO-], _perform with knowledge and zeal; do one's best,
exert one's self_, 25.

+Nê+, adv. and conj. [NA-], _no_; adv., _not_, 3, 17; conj., _that not,
lest_ (after expressions involving fear), 1, 5, 8, etc.

+Necessârius+, -a, -um, adj. [2 NEC-], _unavoidable; pressing,
urgent_, 21.

+Necessitâs+, -âtis, F. [2 NEC-], _unavoidableness; necessity,
compulsion_, 11; _urgency_, 22.

+Neg·ôtium+, -î, N., [1 AV-], _not leisure; business, task_, 2;
_trouble, difficulty_, 17.

+Nê·mô+, --, dat. nêminî, abl. wanting, M. and F. [HAM-], _no man;
nobody, no one_, 33.

+Ne·que+ or +nec+, adv. [NA-; CA-, CI-], _and not, and so not_, 3, 5,
10, etc.; neque ... neque, _neither ... nor_, 11, 12, 15, 25.

+Nê·quî·quam+, adv. [CA-, CI-], _not in any way; to no purpose, in
vain_, 27.

+Nerviî+, -ôrum, M., _most warlike tribe of the Belgæ_, 4, 15, 16, etc.

+Neuter+, -tra, -trum, gen. -trîus, adj. [CA-, CI-], _neither
(of two)_, 9.

+Nê·ve+ or +neu+, conj. [NA-], _and not; and that not_, 21.

+Nihil+, indecl., N. [NA-], _nothing_, 15, 26, 28; as adv., _not at
all_, 17, 20.

+Ni·si+, conj. [NA-; SOVO-, SVO-], _if not, unless, except_, 6, 20, 32.

+Nôbilitâs+, -âtis, F. [GNA-, GNO-], _being known; high birth_, 6.

+Noctû+, adv. [1 NEC-, NOC-], _by night_, 33.

+Nôlô+, nôlle, nôluî, --, [VOL-], _not wish; be unwilling_, 1.

+Nômen+, -inis, N. [GNA-, GNO-], _means of knowing; name_, 4, 6, 28.

+Nôminâtim+, adv. [GNA-, GNO-], _by name, expressly_, 25.

+Nôminô+, 1 [GNA-, GNO-], _name, mention_, 18.

+Nôn+, adv. [NA-; 2 I-], _not one; not_, 2, 6, 8, etc.

+Nôn·dum+, adv. [NA-; DIV-], _not yet_, 11.

+Nôn·nûllus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-], _not none; some_, 1, 25.

+Nônûs+, -a, -um, adj., _ninth_, 23.

+Nôs+, nostrum, pl. of ego, pron. [NV-], _we_, 9.

+Noster+, -stra, -strum, poss. pron. [NV-], _our, ours_, 1, 4, 8, etc.

+Novem+, num. adj., indecl., _nine_, 4.

+Noviodûnum+, -î, N., _chief town of Suessiones_, 12.

+Novus+, -a, -um, adj. [NV-], _new, fresh_, 1, 2; _strange, novel_, 31;
superl., _last, in the rear_, 11, 25, 26.

+Nox+, -ctis, F. [1 NEC-, NOC-], _night_, 6, 7, 12, 17.

+Nûdô+, 1, _make bare; bare, strip_, 6; _leave unguarded_, 23.

+N·ûllus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-], _not any; none, no_, 11, 15, 32; as
dat. of nêmô, _no one_, 6, 35.

+Numerus+, -î, M., _distributed thing; number, amount, numbers_, 4, 10,
17, 33.

+Numida+, -ae, M., _Numidian_, 7, 10, 24.

+Nun·c+, adv. [NV-; CA-, CI-], _now, at the present time_, 4.

+Nûntiô+, 1 [NV-], _announce, report_, 2, 26, 28, 29, 32.

+Nûntius+, -î, M. [NV-], _person_ or _thing newly come; messenger_, 1;
_message, news_, 2, 6; w. acc. and infin.


O.

+Ob+, prep. w. acc. [APA-], _towards; on account of_, 35.

+Ob·dûcô+, 3, -xî, -ductum [DVC-], _lead towards; extend, construct_, 8.

+Ob·itus+ (-ûs), M. [1 I-], _going to; destruction_, 29.
  Cf. interneciô.

+Ob·s{e}s+, -idis, M. and F. [SED-], _one staying in a place; hostage_,
1, 3, 5, 13, 15, 35.

+Ob·tineô+, 2, -uî, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _lay hold of; have possession
of, hold_, 4.

+Ob·veniô+, 4, -vênî, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come in the way of;
come against, meet_, 23; w. dat.

+Oc·câsus (obc-)+, -ûs, M. [CAD-], _going down; setting_, 11.

+Oc·cîdô (obc-)+, 3, -cîdî, -cîsum [2 SAC-, SCÎD-, CÎD-], _strike
against; kill, slay_, 10, 25, 33.

+Oc·cultus (obc-)+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of occulô) [2 CAL-], _covered
over; hidden, secret_, 18.

+Oc·cupô (obc-)+, 1 [CAP-], _take hold of; cover, occupy_, 8; _take
possession of, hold_, 1; pass., _be engaged, occupy one's self_, 19.

+Oc·currô (obc-)+, 3, -currî, -cursum [CEL-, CER-], _run towards; fall
in with, meet; come against_, 21, 24, 27.
  Cf. obveniô.

+Ôceanus+, -î, M., _ocean, Atlantic_, 34.

+Octâvus+, -a, -um, adj., _eighth_, 23.

+Octô+, num. adj., indecl., _eight_, 6, 7.

+Of·ferô (obf-)+, -ferre, obtulî, oblâtum [1 FER-], _bring towards;
offer, bear, carry_, 21.

+O·mittô+, 3, -mîsî, -mîssum [MIT-], _let go; neglect, leave
untried_, 17.

+Omnis+, -e, adj. [AP-, OP-], _every, all, entire_, 1, 2, 3, etc.

+Onus+, -eris, N. [AN-], _burden; bulk, weight_, 30.

+Opera+, -ae, F. [AP-, OP-], _working; work, service_, 25.

+Opîniô+, -ônis, F. [AP-, OP-], _thinking; impression, idea,
expectation_, 8, 35; _reputation_, 8, 24.

+O·portet+, 2, -uit, --, impers. [2 PAR-, POR-], _is necessary; must,
ought_, 20; w. pass. infin. or acc. and infin.

+Op·pidânus (obp-)+, -a, -um, adj. [PED-], _of a town_; as noun, M.,
_townsman, inhabitant of a town (other than Rome)_, 7, 33.

+Op·pidum (obp-)+, -î, N. [PED-], _on the ground; town_, 3, 4, 6, etc.
  Cf. urbs; vîcus.

+Op·portûnus (obp-)+, -a, -um, adj. [1 PAR-, PER-], _of what is opposite
the harbor; suitable, convenient_, 8.
  Cf idôneus.

+Op·pûgnâtiô (obp-)+, -ônis, F. [PAC-, PVG-], _act of assaulting; mode
of attack, assault_, 6.

+Op·pûgnô+, 1 [PAC-, PVG-], _fight against; attack, storm_, 6; _carry by
assault_, 12.

(+Ops+), opis, F. (no nom. or dat. sing.) [AP-, OP-], _obtaining thing;
help, aid_, 31; pl., _resources_, 14.

+Optimus+, -a, -um, adj. used as superl. of bonus [AP-, OP-],
_best_, 10.

+Opus+, -eris, N. [AP-, OP-], _obtaining thing; work, siege-work_, 12,
19, 20, 21; quantô opere, _how greatly_, mâgnô opere, _very much_, 5.

+Opus+, indecl. N. (really same word as above) [AP-, OP-], w. est, _is
necessary, is needed_, 8, 22.

+Ôrâtiô+, -ônis, F., _speaking; address, speech, words_, 5, 21.

+Ôrdô+, -inis, M. [OL-, OR-], _weaving; succession, order_, 11, 19, 22;
_rank, line_, 11, 19.

+Orior+, 4, ortus [OL-, OR-], _bestir one's self; arise, be raised_, 24;
_be descended from_, 4.

+Osismî+, -ôrum, M., _people of Gaul (in Brittany)_, 34.


P.

+P.+, abbrev. of Publius, 25, 34.

+Pâbulum+, -î, N. [PA-], _thing affecting feeding; fodder, forage_, 2.

+Pâcô+, 1 [PAC-], _bring to peace; subdue_, 1, 35.

+Paemanî+, -ôrum, M., _German tribe of the Belgæ_, 4.

+Paene+, adv., _nearly, almost_, 10, 24.

+Palûs+, -ûdis, F., _thing having wet clay; marsh, swamp, morass_, 9,
10, 28.

+Pandô+, 3, -dî, passum [2 PAT-, PAD-], _cause to go; spread out,
extend_, 13.

+Pâr+, paris, adj. [1 PAR-, PER-], _equal_, 18.

+Parâtus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of parô) [2 PAR-, POR-], _brought; made
ready, ready, prepared_, 3, 9, 21; w. infin. or expression of purpose.

+Pars+, partis, F. [2 PAR-, POR-], _that cut; part, portion_, 1, 4, 9,
etc.; _quarter, direction_, 21, 24, 29; _point, side_, 5, 8, 22.

+Partim+, adv. (acc. of Pars) [2 PAR-, POR-], _by a dividing; partly_,
1, 33.

+Parvulus+, -a, -um, dim. adj. [PAV-], _very small; slight,
unimportant_, 30.

+Passus+, -ûs, M. [1 PAT-], _going; double pace, step, pace_, 8, 18;
mîlia passuum, _mile_ (= 5000 feet), 6, 7, 11, 13, 16.

+Pate·faciô+, 3, -fêcî, -factum [2 PAT-; FAC-], _make open; open, throw
open_, 32.

+Pateô+, 2, -uî, -- [2 PAT-], _stand open; be open, spread out,
extend_, 7, 8.

+Pater+, -tris, M. [PA-], _accomplisher of protecting or nourishing;
father_, 4.

+Patior+, 3, passus, _suffer, endure_, 31; _suffer, allow_, 15.

+Patrius+, -a, -um, adj. [PA-], _of a father; of one's ancestors,
ancestral_, 15.

+Paucus+, -a, -um, adj. [PAV-], _made to cease_; pl. only, _few_, 18; as
substantive, _a few, small number_, 12.

+Paulâtim+, adv. [PAV-], _by little and little; gradually, gently_,
8, 26.

+Paulis·per+, adv. [PAV-; 1 PAR-], _for a short time_, 7.

+Paulô+, adv. (abl. N. of paulus) [PAV-], _by a little; a little_, 20.

+Paululum+, dim. adv. [PAV-], _very little; very slightly_, 8.

+Paulum+, adv. (acc. N. of paulus) [PAV-], _a little_, 25.

+Pâx+, pâcis, F. [PAC-], _binding thing; peace_, 6, 13, 15, 29, 31, 32.

+Ped{e}s+, -itis, M. [PED-], _one that goes on foot; foot-soldier_, 24.

+Pedester+, -tris, -tre, adj. [PED-], _of infantry, infantry_, 17.

+Pedius+, -î, M., _Quintus Pedius_, Cæsar's nephew, and lieutenant under
him, 2, 11.

+Pellis+, -is, F. [PLE-], _hide, skin_, 33.

+Pellô+, 3, pepulî, pulsum [PAL-, PEL-], _cause to move; drive,
dislodge_, 24; _rout, defeat_, 17, 19, 24.

+Per+, prep. w. acc. [1 PAR-, PER-], _through; by, by means of_, 11, 20,
31; _on account of_, 16; _through, by way of_, 16; _over_, 10.

+Per·ferô+, -ferre, -tulî, -lâtum [1 FER-], _carry through; bear,
endure_, 14; _bear, spread among_, 35.

+Perîclitor+, 1 [1 PAR-, PER-], _test; prove, make trial_, 8.

+Perîculum+, -î, N. [1 PAR-, PER-], _means of trying, trial; danger,
peril_, 5, 11, 26.

+Per·mittô+, 3, -mîsî, -mîssum [MIT-], _let through; yield, give up_, 3,
31; w. acc. and dat.

+Per·moveô+, 2, -môvî, -môtum [1 MV-, MOV-], _stir up thoroughly;
disturb, alarm_, 12, 24.

+Per·spiciô+, 3, -spêxî, -spectum [SPEC-], _see through_, 17, 18;
_perceive clearly, find out, ascertain_, 11, 17, 32.

+Per·suâdeô+, 2, -sî, -sum, _thoroughly advise; prevail upon, persuade_,
10, 16; w. dat. and subjunctive w. ut.

+Per·terreô+, 2 [TER-], _thoroughly frighten; demoralize, render
panic-stricken_, 24, 27.
  Cf. perturbô.

+Per·tineô+, 2, -uî, -- [1 TA-, TEN-], _thoroughly hold; extend
to_, 19.

+Per·turbô+, 1 [TVR-], _throw into utter confusion; disconcert, alarm_,
11, 21.
  Cf. permoveô.

+Per·veniô+, 4, -vênî, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come quite to; reach,
arrive at_, 2, 11, 15, 17.

+Pês+, pedis, M. [PED-], _going thing; foot_, 5, 18, 29, 30.

+Petô+, 3, -îvî and -iî, -îtum [PET-], _fall upon; seek_, 20, 24; _aim
at, make for_, 11, 23; _seek, make request, ask_, 12, 14, w. ut and
subjunct.; _ask, beg_, 13, 31, w. acc.

+Pîlum+, -î, N. [PIS-], _crushing thing; heavy javelin_, 23, 27.

+Plânitiês+ (-êî), F. [PLAT-], _flatness; level stretch of country,
plain_, 8.

+Plêrum·que+, adv. (acc. N. of plêrusque), _for the most part,
generally_, 30.

+Plêrus·que+, -raque, -rumque, adj. [PLE-; CA-, CI-], _larger part of;
most of_, 4.

+Plûrimus+, -a, -um, adj. (used as superl. of multus) [PLE-, PLO-,
PLV-], _most_; acc. N. as adv., _most_, 4.

+Pol·liceor+, 2 [LIC-, LIQV-], _offer very much; offer, promise_, 4, 35.

+Pondus+, -eris, N., _weighing thing; weight, bulk_, 29.
  Cf. onus.

+Pônô+ [for portsinô], 3, posuî, positum [1 SA-, SI-], _let down; place,
establish, pitch_, 5, 7, 8, 13; _place, base on_, 11.

+Pôns+, pontis, M. [1 PAT-], _means of going; bridge_, 5, 9, 10.

+Populor+, 1 [SCAL-, SPOL-], _pour out people; lay waste, ravage, raid_,
5, 9.
  Cf. dêpopulor, vâstô.

+Populus+, -î, M. [PLE-, PLO-], _the many; people, nation_, 1, 3, 13,
etc.
  Cf. gêns.

+Por·rêctus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of porrigô) [REG-, RIG-], _stretched
out, stretched forward_, 19.

+Porta+, -ae, F. [1 PAR-, POR-], _thing passed through; gate_, 6, 24,
32, 33.

+Portô+, 1 [1 PAR-, POR-], _bear along, carry, convey_, 5, 29.

+Poscô+, 3, poposcî, -- [PREC-] _ask for urgently; demand,
request_, 15.
  Cf. petô.

+Pos·sideô+, 2, -sêdî, -sessum [SED-], _have and hold, possess_, 4.

+Pos·sum+, posse, potuî [POT-], _be able, can_, 1, 3, 4, etc.; _amount
to, be influential_ or _powerful_, 4, 8.

+Post+, prep. w. acc. [POS-], _behind; after_, 14, 29; _behind_, 5,
9, 19.

+Post·eâ+, adv. [POS-; 2 I-], _after this; afterwards_, 17, 30, 32.

+Post·quam+, conj. [POS-; CA-], _after that; after, as soon as,
when_, 5.

+Postrêmô+, _at last, finally_.

+Postrî·diê+, adv. (contr. from posterô diê) [POS-; DIV-, DI-], _on the
day after_, 12, 33; w. gen.

+Postulô+, 1 [PREC-], _ask, demand, require_, 4, 22, 33.
  Cf. poscô.

+Potêns+, -entis, adj. [POT-], _able, mighty, powerful_, 1, 4.

+Potestâs+, -âtis, F. [POT-], _ability; power, control_, 3, 31, 34;
_power, ability_, 6.

+Potior+, 4 [POT-], _become master of; get control of, gain_, 7, 24, 26;
w. abl.

+Potius+, adv. (compar.) [POT-], _rather, preferably_, 10; foll. by
quam.

+Prae+, prep. w. abl. [PRO-, PRI-, PRAE-], _before; in comparison
with_, 30.

+Prae·acûtus+, -a, -um, adj. [1 AC-], _sharpened in front; pointed,
sharpened at the point_, 29.

+Prae·beô+ [for praehibeô], 2 [HAB-], _hold forth; furnish, afford_, 17.

+Prae·ceps+, -ipitis, adj. [CAP-], _head foremost; headlong, in
haste_, 24.

+Prae·dor+ [for praehedor], 1, _make booty; plunder, raid_, 17, 24.

+Prae·ferô+, -ferre, -tûlî, -lâtum [1 FER-], _bear before; place before,
thrust forward, outdo_, 27; w. acc. and dat.

+Prae·ficiô+, 3, -fêcî, -fectum [FAC-], _place over; put at the head of,
place in command of_, 11; w. acc. and dat.

+Prae·mittô+, 3, -mîsi, -mîssum [MIT-], _send before; send in advance_,
11, 17, 19.

+Prae·scrîbô+, 3, -psî, -ptum [SCARP-, SCALP-], _write before; dictate,
prescribe, direct_, 20; w. dat. and indir. question.

+Prae·sertim+, adv. [1 SER-, SVAR-], _by an arranging before;
especially, particularly_, 30.

+Prae·sidium+, -î, N. [SED-], _sitting before; guard, defence, support_,
5, 19, 26, 29, 33; _protection, safety_, 11.

+Prae·stô+, 1, -stitî, -- [STA-], _stand before; excel_, 15; _put
forth, exhibit_, 27; _be preferable, be better_ (impers.), 31.

+Prae·sum+, -esse, -fuî [ES-], _be before; be in charge of, command_, 6,
9; w. dat.

+Praeter·eâ+, _in addition_.

+Premô+, 3, pressî, pressum, _press; push closely, press hard_, 24.

+Prîmi·pîlus+, -î, M. [PRO-, PRI-; PIS-], _first centurion of the
triarii_, 25.

+Prîmô+, adv. [PRO-], _at first_, 8.

+Prîmum+, adv. (acc. N. of prîmus) [PRO-, PRI-], _first thing; first, in
the first place_, 1, 10, 30; cum prîmum, _as soon as_, 2.

+Prîmus+, -a, -um, adj. [PRO-, PRI-], _first, foremost_, 10, 11, 17,
etc.; as noun, M., _chief, leading man_, 3, 13.

+Prîn·ceps+, -ipis, adj. [PRO-, PRI-; CAP-], _taking first place_; as
noun, _leader, chief_, 5, 14.
  Cf. prîmus.

+Prior+, -ius, gen. -ôris, adj. [PRO-, PRI-], _former; those preceding,
men in front_, 11. Opp. novissimî.

+Prîs·tinus+, -a, -um, adj. [PRO-, PRI-; 1 TA-, TEN-] _former; former,
old time_, 21.

+Prius+, adv. (acc. N. of prior) [PRO-, PRI-], _earlier, sooner_, 32;
foll. by quam.

+Prius·quam+, adv., conj. (= prius quam) [PRO-, PRI-; CA-], _sooner
than, before_, 12; w. subj.
  Cf. prius quam, 32.

+Prô+, prep. w. abl. [PRO-, PRI-], _before; in front of, before_, 8; _in
behalf of_, 14; _in proportion to, to the best of one's ability_, 25;
_in accordance with, agreeably to_, 31.

+Prô·cêdô+, 3, -cessî, -cessum [CAD-], _go forward; advance, proceed_,
20, 25.

+Pro·cul+, adv. [CEL-], _driven forward; at a distance, afar off_, 30.

+Prô·cumbô+, 3, -cubuî, -cubitum, _bend forwards; fall forward, sink to
the ground_, 27.

+Proelior+, 1, _fight, contend_, 23.
  Cf. dîmicô, congredior.

+Proelium+, -î, N., _fighting, fight_, 23, 25, 26, 27; _skirmish,
engagement, battle_, 8, 9, 20, 21, 28, 30.

+Pro·fectiô+, -ônis, F. [FAC-], _going away; setting out,
departure_, 11.

+Pro·ficîscor+, 3, -fectus [FAC-], _begin to go forward; set out, go,
march_, 2, 21, 25, 35.

+Prô·flîgô+, 1 [FLAG-, FLIG-], _strike to the ground; rout, defeat_, 23.
  Cf. pellô, côniciô.

+Pro·fugiô+, 3, -fûgî, -- [2 FVG-], _flee before; flee for refuge,
escape_, 14.

+Prô·gnâtus+, -a, -um, adj. [GEN-, GN-, GNA-], _born, descended, sprung
from_, 29.

+Prô·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go forward; advance, proceed_,
10, 23.
  Cf. prôcêdô.

+Pro·hibeô+, 2 [HAB-], _hold before; hinder, prevent_, 4, w. acc. and
infin.; _keep from, cut off_, 9, 28, w. acc. and abl.

+Prô·iciô+, 3, -iêcî, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _cast forward; give up,
abandon, renounce_, 15.

+Prô·moveô+, 2, -môvî, -môtum [1 MV-, MOV-], _move forward,
advance_, 31.

+Prope+, adv. [PARC-, PLEC-], _near; nearly, almost_, 28, 32.

+Pro·perô+, 1 [2 PAR-, POR-], _hasten, make haste_, 11, 35.

+Propînquitâs+, -âtis, F. [PARC-, PLEC-], _nearness, proximity_, 20;
_family connection, kinship_, 4.
  Cf. adfînitâs.

+Propînquus+, -a, -um, adj. [PARC-, PLEC-], _being near; near, close,
adjacent_, 35, w. dat.

+Prô·pônô+, 3, -posuî, -positum [1 SA-, SI-], _place before; put forth,
expose to view, display_, 20.

+Prop·ter+, prep. w. acc. [PARC-, PLEC-], _near; on account of_, 4, 8,
12, 16, 20.

+Propter·eâ+, adv. [PARC-, PLEC-], _on account of that_; foll. by quod,
_for the reason (that), because_, 4; foll. by indic.

+Prô·pûgnô+, 1 [PAC-, PAG-, PVG-], _fight before; fight in defence, make
defensive sallies_, 7.

+Prô·sequor+, 3, -secûtus [SEC-], _follow onward; pursue, follow after_,
11; _follow, address_, 5.

+Prô·spectus+, -ûs, M. [SPEC-], _forward look; out-look, distant view,
prospect_, 22.

+Prô·tinus+, adv. [1 TA-, TEN-], _before one's self; at once,
immediately_, 9.

+Prô·turbô+, 1 [TVR-], _drive forward; drive off, frighten away_, 19.
  Cf. pellô.

+Prô·videô+, 2, -vîdî, -vîsum [VID-], _see before; look out, see, attend
to_, 22.

+Prô·vincia+, -ae, F. [VIC-], _territory acquired by conquest;
province_, 29.

+Prô·volô+, 1, -âvî, --, _fly forth; hasten forth, hurry forward_, 19.

+Proximê+, adv., superl. of prope [PARC-, PLEC-], _nearest; most
recently, last_, 8, 19.

+Proximus+, -a, -um, adj. (superl. of propior, no pos.) [PARC-, PLEC-],
_nearest, closest_, 3, 12, 33; _next, following_, 27, (of time) 12, 35.

+Prû·dentia+ (for prô·videntia), -ae, F. [VID-], _seeing before;
foresight, wisdom, prudence_, 4.

+Pûblicus+, -a, -um, adj. [PLE-, PLO-], _belonging to the people_; w.
rês, _republic, state, government_, 5.

+Puer+, -erî, M., _one begotten; boy, child_, 13, 28.

+Pûgna+, -ae, F. [PAC-, PAG-, PVG-], _thrusting thing; fight, battle_,
16, 25, 28, 29.
  Cf. proelium.

+Pûgnô+, 1 [PAC-, PAG-, PVG-], _fight, contend_, 8, 10, 21, 26, 27, 33.
  Cf. congredior, contendô, dîmicô, proelior.


Q.

+Q.+, abbrev. for +Quîntus+, 2, 5, 9, 11.

+Quâ+, adv. (abl. F. of quî) [CA-], _on which side; at what point,
where_, 33.

+Quadrin·gentî+, -ae, -a, num. adj. [CEN-], _four hundred_, 8.

+Quaerô+, 3, -sîvî, -sîtum, _seek; ask, enquire, make enquiry_, 4, 15;
_look for, seek, try to find_, 21.
  Cf. petô.

+Quam+, adv. (acc. of quî) [CA-], _in what manner; than_, 10, 19, 20,
21, 22, 31, 32.
  Cf. âc (19).

+Quam·vîs+, adv. [CA-; VOL-], _as you will; as much as you like,
any-so-ever, any_, 31.

+Quantus+, -a, -um, adj. [CA-], _how great, how many_, 4, 5, 14, 26, in
indir. quest.; _as great as, as much as_, 8, 11.
  Cf. tantus.

+Quartus+, -a, -um, adj., _fourth_, 25.

+Quattuor+, num. adj., indecl., _four_, 33.

+Que+, enclitic conj. [CA-, CI-], _and_, 1, 2, 3, etc.
  Joins kindred expressions; sometimes couples a sentence to a
  preceding one.
  Cf. et, atque.

+Quî+, quae, quod, rel. and adj. pron. [CA-, CI-], _who, which, what,
that_, 1, 2, 3, etc.

+Quî·dam+, quaedam, quoddam, indef. pron. [CA-, CI-; 3 DA-], _certain
one, some one_, 17.

+Qui·dem+, adv. [CA-, CI-; 3 DA-], _certainly_; nê ... quidem, enclosing
emphatic word or expression, _not even_, 3, 17.

+Quî·n+, conj. w. subj. [CA-, CI-; NA-], _by which not; but that, that,
from_, 2, 3.

+Quî·nam (quis-)+, quae-, quod-, interrog. pron. [CA-, CI-], _for who?
who, which, what, pray? what in the world?_ 30.

+Quîn·decim+, num. adj., indecl. [DEC-], _fifteen_, 2, 4, 30, 35.

+Quîn·gentî+, -ae, -a, num. adj. [CEN-], _five hundred_, 28.

+Quînquâ·gintâ+, num. adj., indecl., _fifty_, 4, 33.

+Quînque+, num. adj., indecl., _five_.

+Quis+, quae, quid? interrog. pron. [CA-, CI-], _who? which? what?_
4, 8, 11, etc.
  Indef. after sî and nê, _any one, any_, 8, 14, 32, 33.

+Quis·quam+, --, quicquam (quidq-), indef. pron. [CA-, CI-], _any, any
at all_, 17; in negative clauses.

+Quis·que+, quae-, quid- (quod-), indef. pron. [CA-, CI-], _each, each
one, every_, 4, 10, 11, 21, 22, 25.

+Quis·quis+, --, quicquid (quidq-) or quodquod, indef. rel. pron.
[CA-, CI-], _whatever, whatsoever, everything which_, 17.

+Quô+, rel. adv. (dat. and abl. of quî) [CA-, CI-], _in what place_;
(dat. use) _where, whither_, 16 17, 21; conj. (rel. adv.), = ut eô, _by
which, so that, that_, 25.

+Quod+, conj. (acc. N. of qui) [CA-, CI-], _that; in that, because_, 1,
4, 10, etc.; _the fact that_, 17.

+Quo·que+, adv. [CA-, CI-], _also, too, as well_, 10, 22; placed after
word to be emphasized.


R.

+Râmus+, -î, M., _growing thing; branch_, 17.

+Ratiô+, -ônis, F. [RA-], _reckoning; consideration_, 10; _plan, method,
system_, 19, 22.

+Re-, Red-+, _back, away_, in comp. only.

+Re·cipiô+, 3, -cêpî, -ceptum [CAP-], _take back; admit, receive_, 3,
15; with reflex. pron., _recover_, 12; _betake one's self, retreat, go_,
11, 19, 24.
  Cf. sê cônferre.

+Red·dô+, 3, -didî, -ditum [1 DA-], _give back; render_, 5.

+Red·eô+, -îre, -iî, -itum [1 I-], _go back; recede, decline, slope
away_, 8.

+Red·igô+, 3, -êgî, -âctum [AG-], _drive back; bring down, reduce_, 14,
28, 34; _render_, 27.
  Cf. reddô.

+Red·in·tegrô+, 1 [TAG-], _make whole again; renew, restore_, 23,
25, 27.

+Rêdonês+, -um, M., _tribe of Brittany_, 34.

+Re·dûcô+, 3, -xî, -ductum [DVC-], _lead back_, 9.

+Re·ferô+, -ferre, rettulî, -lâtum [1 FER-], _bear back; report,
announce_, 33.
  Cf. adferô, renûntiô.

+Re·fringô+, 3, -frêgî, -frâctum, _break back; break open, tear
open_, 33.

+Regiô+, -ônis, F. [REG-], _directing, direction; region, district,
locality, country_, 4.

+Rêgnum+, -î, N. [REG-], _that which rules; power, control_, 1.

+Rê·iciô+, 3, -iêcî, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _hurl back; throw back, drive
back_, 33.

+Re·languêscô+, 3, -guî, -- [LAG-], _lose energy, be weakened_, 15.

+Re·linquô+, 3, -lîquî, -lîctum [LIC-, LIQV-] _leave behind, leave_, 5,
8, 29.

+Re·liquus+, -a, -um, adj. [LIC-, LIQV-], _remaining; other, rest of_,
2, 3, 5, etc.; as noun, M., _the rest, the others_, 10, 25.

+Rêmî+, -ôrum, M., _people of Belgium on the Axona_, 3, 4, 5, etc.

+Re·mittô+, 3, -mîsî, -mîssum [MIT-], _send back; hurl back, return_,
27; _relax, weaken_, 15.

+Rêmus+, -î, M., _a Remian_, 6.

+Re·nûntiô+, 1 [NV-], _bring back word; announce, report_, 24; w. dat.
and acc. and infin.
  Cf. adferô, referô.

+Re·pellô+, 3, reppulî, -pulsum [PAL-, PEL-, PVL-], _drive back,
repulse_, 10.
  Cf. rêiciô.

+Repentînô+, adv. (abl. of repentînus), _suddenly_, 33.

+Re·periô+, 4, repperî, -pertum [2 PAR-, POR-], _produce again; find,
find out, ascertain_, 9; w. acc. and infin., 4, 15.

+Rês+, reî, F. [RA-], _thing spoken of; thing, circumstance, matter,
affair, business, fact_, 1, 2, 3, etc.; rês frûmentâria, _grain-supply,
provisions_, 2; rês pûblica, _state, republic_, 5.

+Re·sistô+, 3, -stitî, -- [STA-], _stand back; hold one's ground,
maintain one's position, resist_, 22, 23, 26.

+Re·spiciô+, 3, -spêxî, -spectum [SPEC-], _look back, look behind
one_, 24.

+Re·spondeô+, 2, -ndî, -spônsum, _promise in return; reply, answer_, 32.

+Re·tineô+, 2, -uî, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _keep back; keep up,
maintain_, 21; _keep back, reserve_, 32, 33.

+Re·vertor+, 3, -versus (active in perfect, pluperfect, and future
perfect: reverti, reverteram, revertero) [VERT-], _turn back; return, go
back_, 10, 14, 29, 35.

+Re·vocô+, 1 (VOC-, VAG-), _call back, summon_, 20.

+Rêx+, rêgis, M. [REG-], _ruler; king, chieftain_, 4, 13.

+Rhênus+, -î, M., _the Rhine_, 3, 4, 29, 35.

+Rîpa+, -ae, F., _bank, river-bank_, 5, 23, 27.

+Rômânus+, -a, -um, adj., _Roman_, 1, 3, etc.; as noun, M., _Roman_, 10,
12, 13, etc.

+Rubus+, -î, M., _red-colored thing; bramble_, 17.

+Rûmor+, -ôris, M., _sounding; report, rumor_, 1.

+Rûpês+, -is, F. [RAP-, RVP-], _broken thing; cliff, steep rock_, 29.

+R·ûrsus+, adv. [VERT-], _turned back; again, back again_, 19, 23, 24.


S.

+Sabînus+, -î, M., _Q. Titurius Sabinus, lieutenant of Cæsar_, 5.

+Sabis+, -is, M., _river Sambre in country of Nervii_, 16, 18.

+Saepês+, -is, F. [1 SAC-, SAG-], _hedge_, 17, 22.

+Sagittârius+, -î, M. [1 SAC-, SAG-], _of an arrow; archer, bowman_, 7,
10, 19.

+Salûs+, -ûtis, F. [SAL-, SER-], _being well; preservation, salvation,
safety_, 27, 33; _well-being, welfare_, 5.

+Sarcinae+, -ârum, F., _bundle; luggage, personal baggage_, 17.

+Saxum+, -î, N. [2 SAC-, SEC-], _fragment of rock; rock, stone_, 29.

+Scientia+, -ae, F. [2 SAC-, SEC-, SCI-], _knowing; knowledge_, 20.

+Scrîbô+, 3, -psî, -ptum [SCARP-, SCALP-], _scratch; write, give an
account_, 29.

+Scûtum+, -î, N. [SCV-, CV-], _covering thing; shield_, 21, 25, 27, 33.

+Sectiô+, -ônis, F. [2 SAC-, SEC-], _cutting; lot of booty, booty_, 33.

+Secundum+, prep. w. acc. (acc. N. of secundus) [SEC-], _following; in
the direction of, along_, 18.

+Secundus+, -a, -um, adj. [SEC-], _following; second_, 11; _successful,
favorable_, 9.

+Sed+, co-ord. conj., adversative [SOVO-, SVO-], _apart from; but_, 14,
17, 19, 20, 21, 32.

+Senâtor+, -ôris, M. [SEN-], _old man; elder, senator_, 28.

+Senâtus+, -ûs, M. [SEN-], _office of an old man; council, senate_, 5.

+Senonês+, -um, M., _tribe on upper Seine_, 2.

+Sententia+, -ae, F. [SENT-], _thinking; opinion, view_, 10.

+Sentês+, -ium, M., _thorns, briars, brambles_, 17.

+Septimus+, -a, -um, adj., _seventh_, 23, 26.

+Sequor+, 3, secûtus [SEC-], _follow; go along, accompany_, 17; _follow,
result_, 22.

+Servitûs+, -ûtis, F. [1 SER-, SVAR-], _slavery, servitude,
subjection_, 14.

+Servô+, 1 [SAL-, SER-], _save; keep, maintain_, 33.

+Sex+, num. adj., indecl., _six_, 5, 8, 19, 29.

+Sexâgintâ+, num. adj., indecl., _sixty_, 4.

+Sex·centî+, -ae, -a, num. adj. [CEN-], _six hundred_, 15, 28.

+Sî+, conj. [SOVO-, SVO-], _if, in case_, 5, 8, 9, etc.; _to see if,
whether_, 9, w. indir. question.

+Sî·c+, adv. [3 SA-; CA-, CI-], _in this manner; so, in such a manner_,
32; _in following manner, as follows_, 4, 15.

+Sîgni·fer+, -erî, M. [3 SAC-; 1 FER-], _standard-bearer, ensign_, 25.

+Sîgni·ficâtiô+, -ônis, F. [3 SAC-; FAC-], _pointing out; announcement,
signal_, 33.

+Sîgni·ficô+, 1 [3 SAC-; FAC-], _show by signs; indicate, show_, 7;
_announce, make known_, 13; w. acc. and infin.

+Sîgnum+, -î, N. [3 SAC-], _mark; signal, sign_, 20, 21; _military
standard, ensign_, 21, 25, 26; -- convertere, _face about, wheel_, 26;
-- înferre, _advance to attack, charge_, 25; ad -- cônsistere, _rally
round the standards_, 21.

+Silva+, -ae, F. [2 SER-, SVAL-], _wood, forest_, 18, 19.

+Silvestris+, -e, adj. [2 SER-, SVAL-], _of a wood; wooded_, 18.

+Simul+, adv. [2 SA-, SIM-], _together; at the same time_, 24.

+Si·ne+, prep. w. abl. [SOVO-], _without_, 5, 11, 15, 25, 31.

+Singulâris+, -e, adj. [2 SA-, SEM-, SIM-], _one by one; remarkable,
extraordinary_, 24.
  Cf. eximius.

+Singulî+, -ae, -a, distrib. num. adj. [2 SA-, SEM-, SIM-], _one to
each; one at a time, separate, single_, 17, 20.

+Sinister+, -tra, -trum, adj. left, _on the left_, 23.

+Sôl+, -is, M. [2 SER-, SVAL-], _sun_, 11.

+Solli·citô+, 1 [SAL-; CI-], _move violently; stir up, instigate,
incite_, 1.

+Sôlum+, adv. (acc. N. of sôlus) [SAL-, SER-], _alone, only_, 14.

+Sôlus+, -a, -um, adj. [SAL-, SER-], _alone, only, sole_, 4.

+Spatium+, -î, N., [SPA-, PA-], _race-course; space, distance_, 17, 30;
_extent, time_, 11.

+Speciês+, -iêî, F. [SPEC-], _seeing; sight, form, appearance_, 31.

+Speculâtor+, -ôris, M. [SPEC-], _searcher; scout, spy_, 11.
  Cf. explôrâtor.

+Spês+, -eî, F. [SPA, PA-], _hope, expectation_, 7, 25, 27, 33.

+Spîritus+, -ûs, M., _breathing; feeling, pride, haughtiness_, 4.

+Statim+, adv. [STA-], _in standing; at once, immediately_, 11.
  Cf. prôtinus.

+Statiô+, -ônis, F. [STA-], _standing; guard, out-post, picket_, 18.

+Statuô+, 3, -uî, -ûtum [STA-], _make stand; fix, determine, decide_,
8, 31.

+Statûra+, -ae, F. [STA-], _standing upright; stature, size_, 30.

+Strepitus+, -ûs, M., _clashing, clatter, noise, din_, 11.
  Cf. clâmor, fremitus.

+Studeô+, 2, -uî, -- [SPA-, PA-], _be eager; strive after, be bent
upon, desire_, 1; _devote one's self to, pay attention to_, 17; w. dat.

+Studium+, -î, N. [SPA-, PA-], _zeal, eagerness, enthusiasm_, 7.

+Sub+, prep. w. abl. and acc., _under, beneath_, 17; _near to, toward_,
11, 33.

+Sub·eô+, -îre, -iî, -itum [1 I-], _go under; go near, approach closely,
come up_, 25, 27.
  Cf. adpropînquô, succêdô.

+Sub·itô+, adv. (abl. of subitus) [1 I-], _by coming on stealthily;
suddenly, unexpectedly_, 19; _hastily, offhand_, 33.
  Cf. repentînô.

+Sub·mittô (summ-)+, 3, -mîsî, -mîssum [MIT-], _send below; send to aid,
despatch, send_, 6, 25; w. dat.

+Sub·ruô (surr-)+, 3, -ruî, -rutum, _tear down below; undermine, dig
under_, 6.

+Sub·sequor+, 3, -secûtus [SEC-], _follow closely, pursue_, 11, 19.

+Sub·sidium+, -î, N. [SED-], _sitting behind; reserve forces, reserves_,
22, 25; _aid, assistance, help_, 6, 7, 8, 20, 26.
  Cf. auxilium.

+Suc·cêdô (subc-)+, 3, -cessî, -cessum [CAD-], _go below; draw near,
approach closely_, 6.
  Cf. subeô, adpropînquô.

+Suc·cessus (subc-)+, -ûs, M. [CAD-], _going below; advance, close
approach_, 20.

+Suessiônês+, -um, M., _German tribe north of the Marne_, 3, 4, 12, 13.

+Suî+, sibi, sê (sêsê), reflex. pron. referring to subject or speaker,
[SOVO-, SVO-], _self; of himself, of themselves_, etc., 1, 2, 3, etc.

+Sum+, esse, fuî [ES-], _be; exist, be_, 1, 2, 3, etc.

+Summa+, -ae, F. (f. of summus, sc. rês), _highest (thing); chief
control, general management_, 4, 23.

+Summus+, -a, -um, adj. (superl. of superus), _highest, greatest,
topmost_, 6, 23, 24, 32; _highest part, summit, top_, 18, 26.

+Sû·mô+, 3, -mpsî, -mptum [EM-], _take, claim, assume_, 4.

+Superior+, -ius, gen. -ôris, adj. compar. of superus, _higher, upper_,
18, 23, 26; _preceding, former, past_, 20.
  Cf. altior; prîstinus.

+Superô+, 1, _go over; defeat, vanquish_, 24.
  Cf. vincô.

+Super·sedeô+, 2, -sêdî, -sessum [SED-], _sit over; refrain from, omit,
postpone_, 8; w. abl.

+Super·sum+, -esse, -fuî [ES-], _be above; remain, survive_, 27, 28.

+Sup·plex (subpl-)+, -icis, adj. [PARC-, PLEC-], _folding the knees
beneath; suppliant, beseeching_, 28.

+Sup·plicâtiô (subpl-)+, -ônis, F. [PARC-, PLEC-], _kneeling down;
thanksgiving_, 35.

+Suprâ+, adv., _on upper side; above, before_, 1, 18, 29.

+Sus·tentô+, 1 [1 TA-, TEN-], _keep holding up; hold out, maintain one's
self_, 6, 14.

+Sus·tineô+, 2, -uî, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _hold up under; withstand,
sustain_, 11, 21; with reflex. pron., _hold out_, 6; _keep upright,
stand up_, 25.

+Suus+, -a, -um, poss. adj. [SOVO-, SVO-], _of himself, his own, their
own_, etc., 3, 4, 5, etc.; as noun, M., _their (his) countrymen,
friends_, 6, 8, 9, etc.; N., _property, possessions_, 3, 13, 29.


T.

+T.+, praenomen _Titus, T. Labienus_, 11, 26.

+Tam+, adv. [2 TA-], _so far; so, to such a degree_, 21.

+Tamen+, adv. [2 TA-], _in so far; still, however; nevertheless_ 8, 32.

+Tantulus+, -a, -um, dim. adj. [2 TA-], _so small; so trifling_, 30.
  Cf. parvulus.

+Tantus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 TA-], _of such size; so great, so much_, 3,
5, 6, etc.

+Tardô+, 1, _make slow, retard, check_, 25.

+Tardus+, -a, -um, adj., _slow (weary, exhausted)_, 25.

+Tegimenta (tegu-)+, -ôrum, N., _means of covering; covering,
cover_, 21.

+Têlum+, -î, N. [TEC-], _missile, weapon, javelin_, 6, 10, 21, 25,
27, 33.

+Tempus+, -oris, N. [1 TA-, TEN-], _time_ (in general), 5, 14, 19, 20,
21, 24, 33, 34; _moment_, 19; _time, period, day_, 17, 35; _emergency,
crisis_, 22.

+Tendô+, 3, tetendî, tentum (tênsum) [1 TA-, TEN-], _stretch; stretch
out, extend_, 13.
  Cf. pandô.

+Teneô+, 2, -uî, -- [1 TA-, TEN-], _hold, have_, 23; _hold,
surround_, 24.

+Tener+, -era, -erum, adj. [1 TA-, TEN-], _tender, young_, 17.

+Terror+, -ôris, M. [TER-, TERS-], _frightening; great fear, fright,
panic_, 12.

+Tertius+, -a, -um, adj., _third_, 1, 32, 33.

+Testûdô+, -inis, F., _having a shell; tortoise, bulwark of shields_, 6.

+Teutonî+, -ôrum (-ês, -um), M., _German tribe_, 4, 29.

+Timeô+, 2, -uî, --, _fear, be afraid, entertain fears_, 26, w. nê
followed by subjunctive.

+Titurius+, -î, M., _Q. Titurius Sabinus, lieutenant of Cæsar's_, 5,
9, 10.

+Titus+, -î, M., _praenomen of Labienus, Cæsar's lieutenant_, 11, 26.

+Tormentum+, -î, N. [TARC- (TARP-), TREP-], _thing twisted; machine of
war, engine for hurling_, 8.

+Tot·idem+, adj., indecl. [2 TA-; 3 DA], _just as many, same number
of_, 4.

+Tôtus+, -a, -um, gen. totîus, adj. [TV-, TO-], _increased; whole,
entire_, 4, 6, 19, 23.

+Trabs+, trabis, F. [TARC- (TARP-), TREP-], _beam, timber_, 29.

+Trâ·dô+, 3, -didî, -ditum [1 DA-], _give over; hand over, give up,
surrender_, 13, 15, 31, 32.

+Trâ·dûcô+, 3, -xî, -ductum [DVC-], _lead over; lead across, bring
over_, 4, 5, 9, 10.

+Trâns+, prep. w. acc., _across, over, beyond_, 16, 35.

+Trâns·eô+, -îre, -iî, -itum [1 I-], _go over; go across, cross_, 9, 10,
23, 24, 27.

+Trâns·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go over; go across, cross_, 19.
  Cf. trânseô.

+Trâns·versus+, -a, -um, adj. [VERT-], _turned across; crosswise, at
right angles, oblique_, 8.

+Três+, tria, gen. -ium, num. adj., _three_, 11, 18, 28, 33.

+Trêverî+, -ôrum, M., _Celtic tribe on the Moselle_, 24.

+Tribûnus+, -î, M., _tribune_, 26.

+Trî·duum+, -î, N. [DIV-, DI-, DIAV-], _three days' time_, 16.

+Tuba+, -ae, F., _trumpet_, 20.

+Tum+, adv. [2 TA-], _then, at that time_, 2, 6; _then, in addition,
further_, 27, 29; cum ... tum, _both ... and_, 4.

+Tumultus+, -ûs, M. [TV-, TVM-], _swelling; confusion, uproar,
noise_, 11.
  Cf. strepitus.

+Tumulus+, -î, M. [TV-, TVM-] _swelling up; mound, hillock, hill_, 27.

+Turonês+, -um (-î, -ôrum), M., _tribe of Gaul on Loire_, 35.

+Turpitûdô+, -inis, F. [TARC- (TARP-), TREP-], _ugliness; disgrace,
dishonor_, 27.

+Turris+, -is, F. [TVR-], _tower_, 12, 30, 33.

+Tûtus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of tueor), _well guarded; safe, secure_,
5, 28.


U.

+Ubi+, rel. adv. [CA-, CI-], _in which place; where_, 8, 35; _when, as
soon as_, 6, 8, 9, 10, 19, 25, 30, 31.

+Ûllus+, -a, -um, gen. ûllîus, dim. adj. [2 I-], _any one (at all),
any_, 11, 15, 25; w. negative expression.

+Ûnâ+, adv. (abl. F. of ûnus) [2 I-], _in one and the same place; at the
same time, together_, 16, 17, 24, 28, 29; foll. by cum and abl.

+Ûn·decimus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-; DEC-], _eleventh_, 23.

+Undi·que+, adv. [CA-, CI-], _whencesoever; from every quarter, from all
sides_, 6, 10.

+Uneîlî+, -ôrum, M., _tribe in Normandy_, 34.

+Ûni·versus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-; VERT-], _turned into one; whole, all,
in a mass_, 33.

+Unus+, -a, -um, gen. -îus, num. adj. [2 I-], _one_, 2, 5, 6, 29, 31,
34; _one, one and the same_, 3, 5, 19, 20; _common, one alone_, 4, 22;
_alone, only_, 33; _a_, 25.

+Urgeô+, 2, ursî, -- [VERG-, VRG-], _press, press hard_, 25, 26.

+Ûsus+, -ûs, M. [1 AV-], _using; practice, experience_, 20; _use,
advantage_, 9, 12.

+Ut+ or +Utî+, conj. [CA-, CI-], _in what manner; as_, 1, 7, 11, etc.,
w. indic.; _in order that, that, to_, 2, 8, 9, etc.; _that, so that_, 3,
4, 5, etc.

+Uter·que+, -traque, -trumque, gen. utrîusque, pron. [CA-, CI-], _both
one and the other; each of two, both_, 8, 16, 25.

+Ûtor+, 3, ûsus [1 AV-], _use, make use of, employ, have_, 3, 7, 10, 25,
28; _use, practise_, 14, 28; _enjoy, maintain_, 32; w. abl.


V.

+Vacuus+, -a, -um, adj., _empty, clear, free, unoccupied_; w. ab and
abl., 12.

+Vadum+, -î, N. [BA-, VA-], _place through which one can go; ford,
crossing_, 9.

+Valeô+, 2, -uî, -itûrus, _be strong, have influence_, 4, 17.

+Vâllum+, -î, N. [1 VEL-, VAL-], _earthen wall; earth-works, rampart_,
5, 30, 33.

+Varius+, -a, -um, adj., _spotted; changing, different_, 22.

+Vâstô+, 1, _make empty; lay waste, ravage_.
  Cf. populor, dêpopulor.

+Velocassês+, -um, M., _one of the minor Belgian tribes_, 4.

+Vên·dô+, 3, -didî (-ditum) [1 DA-], _place for sale; sell_, 33.

+Venellî+, see +Unellî+.

+Venetî+, -ôrum, M., _tribe of Bretagne_, 34.

+Veniô+, 4, vênî, ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come, approach_, 2, 3, 5,
etc.

+Verbum+, -î, N. [VER-], _that spoken; word, discourse,
intercession_, 14.

+Vereor+, 2 [1 VEL-, VER-], _feel awe; fear, be afraid_, 11.

+Vergô+, 3, --, -- [VERG-], _bend, incline_, 18.

+Vêrô+, adv. (abl. N. of vêrus) [VER-], _in truth, in fact, but,
however_, 2, 27, 31.

+Veromanduî+, -ôrum, M., _Gallic tribe in modern Picardy_, 4, 16, 23.

+Versô+, 1 [VERT-], _keep turning_; pass., _be engaged in, be occupied
about_, 24; _dwell, remain, be_, 1.

+Vesper+, -erî or -eris, M., _evening, nightfall_, 33.

+Vester+, -tra, -trum, _your, yours_.

+Vetô+, 1, -uî, -itum [VET-], _leave in old state; advise against,
forbid_, 20.

+Vêxillum+, -î, N. [VAG-, VEH-], _military ensign, banner, flag_, 20.

+Vêxô+, 1 [VAG-, VEH-], _keep carrying; harass, overrun_, 4.

+Vîctor+, -ôris, M. [VIC-], _conqueror, victor_, 28; in appos.
_conquering, victorious_, 24.

+Vîcus+, -î, M., _row of houses; village, hamlet_, 7.

+Videô+, 2, vîdî, vîsum [VID-], _see, perceive_, 12, 19; _see, know_, 5,
10, 24, 25, 26, 30, 31, w. acc. and infin.; pass., _seem, appear_, 11,
16, 18, 28, 33; _seem good, seem best_, 20.

+Vigilia+, -ae, F., _being awake; watch, night-watch_, 11, 33.

+Vîmen+, -inis, N. [VI-, VIC-], _means of binding; willow, withe,
wicker-work_, 33.

+Vincô+, 3, vîcî, vîctum [VIC-], _conquer, defeat_, 28.
  Cf. superô.

+Vînea+, -ae, F. [VI-, VIC-], _shelter for vines; covered shed, movable
shelter_, 12, 30.

+Vînum+, -î, N. [VI-, VIC-], _wine_, 15.

+Vir+, virî, M., _male, man_, 25, 33.

+Virtûs+, -ûtis, F., _manhood; bravery, valor_, 4, 8, 15, 21, 24, 27,
31, 33.

+Vîs+, vim, vî, F., _strength, power_, 30.

+Vîtô+, 1, _shun, try to escape, avoid_, 25.

+Vix+, adv. [VIC-], _with effort; barely, scarcely, hardly_, 28.

+Voluntâs+, -âtis, F. [VOL-], _will, wish, desire_, 4.

+Vôx+, vôcis, F. [VOC], _that which calls out; voice, utterance_,
13, 30.

+Vulgô (volgô)+, adv. (abl. of vulgus) [VERG-, VALG-], _among the
people; generally, commonly_, 1.

+Vulnerô+, 1 [2 VEL-, VOL-], _wound, injure_, 25.

+Vulnus+, -eris, N. [2 VEL-, VOL-], _wound, hurt_, 23, 25, 27.




ETYMOLOGICAL VOCABULARY.


The relation in meaning of some words in certain groups to the root is
sometimes obscure or even impossible to be traced with absolute
certainty. Sometimes the relation is obscured by the omission in this
vocabulary of an interlinking word, because it does not occur in the
text. Let us take an example close at hand, the root AID- and the noun
+aestuârium+. The notion "inlet" seems very remote from the notion
"burn." But +aestuârium+ is formed from +aestus+ (for _aedtus_), the
first meaning of which is _the raging of fire, waves or billows of
heat_. As we might expect, a secondary meaning is, _the raging of water,
waves, billows_, in the proper sense. From the force of the suffix
+-ârium+, +aestuârium+ should mean a _sea-marsh_, or _a tract overflowed
at high tide_; and from this the notion "inlet," the place through which
the tide rushes, comes naturally enough.

The following roots, with their meanings, have been mostly taken from
the excellent Elementary Latin Dictionary of Dr. Charlton T. Lewis.

    1. AC-, sharp, pierce.
  +Aciês+, edge, line of battle.
  +Prae·acûtus+, sharpened at the point.
  +Âcr·iter+, sharply.
  +Acervus+, heap.
  +Co·acervô+, heap up.

    2. AC-, swift.
  +Equ{e}s+, horseman.
  +Equester+, of horsemen.
  +Equitâtus+, cavalry.

    AG-, drive.
  +Agô+, drive, lead.
  +Cô·gô+ [for _con·agô_], drive together, compel.
  +Red·igô+, drive back, reduce.
  +Ager+, land.
  +Âgmen+, marching column.
  +Îgnis+, fire.
  +Ex·agitô+, harass.

    AID-, burn.
  +Aedi·ficium+ [from _aedês, hearth_], building.
  +Aestâs+ [for _aid·tâs_], summer.
  +Aestuârium+ [for _aid·t-_], inlet.

    1. AL-, AR-, feed, grow, raise.
  +Altus+, high.
  +Altitûdô+, height.
  +Arduus+, steep.
  +Arbor+, tree.

    2. AL- (ALI-), other, strange.
  +Alius+, other.
  +Aliâs+, at some other time.
  +Aliênus+, another's.
  +Al·iter+, other-wise.
  +Alter+, the other (of two).

    AM-, love.
  +Amîcus+, friend.
  +Amîcitia+, friendship.
  +In·imîcus+, unfriendly, hostile.

        AN-, breathe.
  +Animus+, spirit.
  +Ex·animô+, make breathless.
  +Onus+ (as the cause of panting), weight.

    ANA-, pronominal stem, third person.
  +In+, in, into.
  +Inter+, between.
  +Inter·eâ+, meanwhile.
  +Inter·im+, meanwhile.
  +Interior+ [compar. of obs. _interus_], inner.
  +Intrâ+, within.
  +Intrô+, enter.
  +?Ille+ [old form _ollus_, from _onolus_], that one.

    ANT-, before, against.
  +Ante+, before, formerly.
  +Antîquitus+, of old.

    AP-, OP-, lay hold of work, help.
  (+Ops+), aid.
  +Opus+, work.
  +Opera+, exertion, service.
  +C·ôpia+ [for _com·opia_], supply.
  +Co·epî+ [for _com·apiô_], begin.
  +Optimus+, best.
  +Omnis+ [for _apnis_], all.
  +Opîniô+, impression.

    APA-, _away, from_.
  +Ab+, from, by.
  +Ap·ud+, among.
  +Ob+, against.

    AR-, fit.
  +Armô+, arm.
  +Arma+, arms.
  +Armâtûra+, equipment.
  +In·ermis+, unarmed.

    ARC-, shut in, keep off.
  +Ex·ercitus+, army.
  +Ex·ercitâtus+, trained.

    1. AV-, mark, desire, delight.
  +Audeô+, dare.
  +Audâc·ter+, boldly.

  +Ûtor+ [for _avtor_], use.
  +Ûsus+, use, experience.
  +In·ûsitâtus+, unusual.
  +In·ûtilis+, useless.
  +Neg·ôtium+ [for _nec·avtium_], business.

    2. AV-, mark, notice.
  +Audiô+, hear.
  +Ex·audiô+, overhear.

    AVG-, grow.
  +Auctôritâs+, power.
  +Auxilium+, aid.

    BA-, VA-, VEN-, go.
  +Ar·bitror+ [for _ad·batror_], believe.
  +Du·bitô+, doubt, hesitate.
  +Vadum+, ford.
  +Veniô+, come.
  +Ad·ventus+, arrival.
  +Circum·veniô+, outflank.
  +Con·veniô+, meet.
  +Dê·veniô+, come to.
  +Ê·ventus+, outcome.
  +In·veniô+, find.
  +Ob·veniô+, fall in with.
  +Per·veniô+, arrive at.

    CA-, CI-, pronominal stem, _who_.
  +Quî+, who.
  +Quî·dam+, a certain one.
  +Qui·dem+, certainly.
  +Quîn+ [for _quî·nê_], but that.
  +Quâ+, where.
  +Quô+, whither.
  +Quod+, because.
  +Quis+, who?
  +Quî·nam+, who, pray?
  +Quis·quam+, any.
  +Nê·quî·quam+, in vain.
  +Quis·quis+, whoever.
  +Quis·que+, each one.
  +Quo·que+, also.
  +Cum (quom)+, when.
  +Quam+, than.
  +Quam·vîs+, how-so-ever.
  +Post·quam+, after.
  +Prius·quam+, sooner than.
  +Quantus+, how great.
  +Que+, and.
  +Ita·que+, and so.
  +Ne·que+, and not.
  +Ubi+ [for _quô·bi_], where.
  +Undi·que+ [for _cunde·que_], from all sides.

  +Cêterî+, the others.
  +Cis+, this side of.
  +Citerior+, hither.
  +Citrâ+, this side of.
  +Ut+ or +Utî+ [for _cutî_ or _quotî_], as, in order that.
  +Uter·que+ [for _quoter·que_], each.
  +Ne·uter+, neither.

  +Cotî·diê+, daily.
  +Hî·c+ [for _hî·ce_], this.
  +Nun·c+ [for _num·ce_], now.
  +Sî·c+ [for _sî·ce_], so.

    CAD-, fall.
  +Cadô+, fall.
  +Ac·cidô (adc-)+, befall.
  +In·cidô+, happen.
  +Cadâver+, dead body.
  +Câsus+, happening.
  +Oc·câsus (obc-)+, setting.
  +Cêdô+, give way.
  +Ac·cêdô (adc-)+, approach.
  +Dis·cêdô+, depart.
  +Dis·cessus+, departure.
  +Ex·cêdô+, withdraw from.
  +Inter·cêdô+, intervene.
  +Prô·cêdô+, advance.
  +Suc·cêdô (subc-)+, approach.
  +Suc·cessus (subc-)+, close approach.
  +Ar·cessô+ [for _ad·cêdsô_], summon.

    1. CAL-, CAR-, call.
  +Con·cilium+, meeting.
  +Clâmor+, shouting.

    2. CAL-, SCAL-, cover, hide.
  +Oc·cultus (obc-)+, hidden.
  +Galea+, helmet.
  +Domi·cilium+, dwelling-place.
  +Cêlô+, hide.

        CAP-, take, hold.
  +Ac·cipiô (adc-)+, receive.
  +In·cipiô+, begin.
  +Inter·cipiô+, intercept.
  +Re·cipiô+, receive.
  +Captîvus+, captive.

  +Oc·cupô (obc-)+, take into possession.
  +Caput+, head.
  +Prae·ceps+, headlong.
  +Prîn·ceps+, leader.

    CAR-, SCAR-, hard, scrape.
  +Cortex+, bark.
  +Cornû+, horn, wing.

    CAV-, watch.
  +Causa+, cause.
  +In·cûsô+, accuse.

    CEL-, CER-, strike, drive.
  +Gladius+ [for _cladius_], sword.
  +Celeritâs+, swiftness.
  +Celer·iter+, swiftly.
  +Pro·cul+, at a distance.
  +Cursus+, running.
  +Con·currô+, run together.
  +Dê·currô+, run down.
  +Oc·currô (obc-)+, meet.
  +Ex·cursiô+, sally.

    CEN-, hundred.
  +Centum+, hundred.
  +Centuriô+, centurion.
  +Du·centî+, two hundred.
  +Quadrin·gentî+, four hundred.
  +Quîn·gentî+, five hundred.
  +Sex·centî+, six hundred.

    1. CER-, CRE-, make.
  +Crêber+, numerous.
  +Corpus+, body.

    2. CER-, CRE-, part.
  +Dê·cernô+, decide upon.
  +Dê·certô+, fight decisively.
  +Certus+, sure.

    CI-, rouse.
  +In·citô+, urge on.
  +Solli·citô (sôli-)+, stir up.

    CLÎ-, lean.
  +Clê·mentia+, mildness.
  +Ad·clîvis (acc-)+, sloping upward.
  +Ad·clîvitâs (acc-)+, upward slope.
  +Dê·clîvis+, sloping downward.

    CRAT-, faith.
  +Crê·do+, [for _crat·dô_], believe.
  +In·crê·dibilis+ [for _in·crat·dibilis_], incredible.

    CVR-, CIR-, curve.
  +Circum+, around.
  +Circi·ter+, about.
  +Circu·itus+, circumference.
  +Cruciâtus+, torture.

    1. DA-, give.
  +Dô+, give.
  +Dê·dô+, give up.
  +Dê·ditîcius+, one who has surrendered.
  +Dê·ditiô+, surrender.
  +Ê·ditus+ [P. of _ê·dô_], rising.
  +Red·dô+, give back.
  +Trâ·dô+ [for _trâns·dô_], give over.
  +Vên·dô+ [for _vênum·dô_], sell.

    2. DA-, put.
  +Ab·dô+, hide.
  +Crê·dô+, believe.
  +In·crê·dibilis+, incredible.
  +Man·dô+, commission.

    3. DA-, pronominal stem, third person.
  +Î·dem+, the same.
  +Quî·dam+, a certain one.
  +Qui·dem+, indeed.
  +Tot·idem+, just as many.

    DEC-, ten.
  +Decem+, ten.
  +Decimus+, tenth.
  +Decumânus (deci-)+, of the tenth (cohort), in the phrase,
      _porta decumâna_, the main entrance to a Roman camp.
  +Ûn·decimus+, eleventh.
  +Duo·decimus+, twelfth.
  +Quîn·decim+, fifteen.

    DÎC-, DIC- (DAC-), show, point.
  +Dîcô+, say.
  +Doceô+, teach.
  +Iû·dicô+, judge.
  (+Diciô+), control.
  +Con·diciô+, condition.

    DIV-, DI-, DIAV-, shine.
  +Dîvînus+, divine.
  +Diês+, day.
  +Cotî·diê+, daily.
  +Postrî·diê+ [for _posterô diê_), next day.
  +Trî·duum+, three days' time.
  +Dum+ [for _dium_], while.
  +Nôn·dum+, not yet.
  +Diû+, for a long time.
  +Iuvô+, [for _diuvô_], aid.
  +Ad·iuvô+, aid.

    DOM-, build.
  +Domus+, home.
  +Domi·cilium+, dwelling-place.
  +Domesticus+, of home.

    DVA-, DVI-, apart, two.
  +Duo+, two.
  +Duo·decimus+, twelfth.
  +Duo·dê·vîgintî+, eighteen.
  +Du·bitô+, doubt, hesitate.
  +Du·centî+, two hundred.
  +Du·plex+, two-fold.
  +Bellum+ [for _duellum_], war.

    DVC-, lead.
  +Dux+, leader.
  +Dûcô+, lead.
  +Ad·dûcô+, bring to.
  +Con·dûcô+, gather.
  +Dê·dûcô+, lead off.
  +Ê·dûcô+, lead out.
  +In·dûcô+, cover.
  +Intrô·dûcô+, lead in.
  +Ob·dûcô+, extend.
  +Re·dûcô+, lead back.
  +Trâ·dûcô+ [for _trâns·dûcô_], lead across.

    EM-, take.
  +Emô+, buy.
  +Ex·imius+, excellent.
  +Sû·mô+ [for _sub·imô_], take.

    ES-, be, live.
  +Sum+ [for _esum_], be.
  +Ab·sum+, be away.
  +Dê·sum+, be lacking.
  +Inter·sum+, be between.
  +Prae·sum+, command.
  +Super·sum+, survive.

    FAC-, put, make.
  +Faciô+, do.
  +Fîô+, passive of _faciô_, become.
  +Côn·ficiô+, accomplish, wear out.
  +Dê·ficiô+, fail.
  +Ef·ficiô+, bring about.
  +Inter·ficiô+, kill.
  +Pate·faciô+, throw open.
  +Prae·ficiô+, place in command.
  +Pro·ficîscor+, put one's self forward, set out.
  +Pro·fectiô+, setting out.
  +Facilis+, easy.
  +Facile+, easily.
  +Aedi·ficium+, building.
  +Ampli·ficô+, enlarge.
  +Dif·ficilis (disf-)+, difficult.
  +Dif·ficultâs (disf-)+, difficulty.
  +Facultâs+, opportunity.
  +Male·ficium+, outrage.
  +Sîgni·ficô+, announce.
  +Sîgni·ficâtiô+, signal.

    FEN-, FEND-, strike.
  +Dê·fendô+, ward off, defend.
  +Dê·fênsiô+, defence.
  +Dê·fênsor+, defender.

    1. FER-, bear.
  +Ferô+, bear.
  +Ad·ferô (aff-)+, bring to.
  +Côn·ferô+, bring together.
  +Dê·ferô+, carry.
  +În·ferô+, bring upon.
  +Of·ferô (obf-)+, carry.
  +Per·ferô+, endure.
  +Prae·ferô+, place before, out-do.
  +Re·ferô+, bring back.
  +Fertilitâs+, fertility.
  +Ferâx+, fertile.
  +Fôrs+, chance.
  +Fôrtûna+, fortune.
  +Sîgni·fer+, standard-bearer.

    2. FER-, FRE-, hold, fix.
  +Ferê+, almost.
  +Côn·fîrmô+, give assurance, reassure.
  +Fortis+ [for _forctis_], brave.
  +Fort·iter+, bravely.

    1. FID-, FÎD-, bind, trust.
  +Fidês+, faith.
  +Côn·fîdô+, trust.

    2. FID-, split.
  +Fînis+ [for _fidnis_], limit.
  +Fînitimus+, neighboring.
  +Ad·fînitâs+, connection by marriage.

    FLAG-, FLIG-, strike.
  +Côn·flîgô+, contend with.
  +Prô·flîgô+, defeat.

        1. FVG-, FRVG-, use, enjoy.
  +Frûmentum+ [for _frûgimentum_], grain.
  +Frûmentârius+, of grain.

    2. FVG-, bend, flee.
  +Fuga+, flight.
  +Fugiô+, flee.
  +Pro·fugiô+, flee.

    FVR-, FERV-, rage, swell.
  +Furor+, frenzy.
  +?Frôns+, front.

    GEN-, GN-, GNA-, beget.
  +Nâscor (gn-)+, arise.
  +Ê·nâscor+, grow out.
  +Nâtus+, birth.
  +Nâtiô+, nation.
  +Nâtûra+, nature.
  +Prô·gnâtus+, sprung from.

    GER-, carry.
  +Gerô+, carry on.
  +Ag·ger (adg-)+, mound.

    GNA-, GNO-, know.
  +Nam+, for.
  +Nâvô+ [for _gnâvô_], perform with knowledge and zeal.
  +Cô·gnôscô+, learn.
  +Nôbilitâs+, high birth.
  +Nômen+, name.
  +Nôminâtim+, by name.
  +Nôminô+, mention.

    GRAD-, walk.
  +Ad·gredior (agg-)+, attack.
  +Con·gredior+, meet.
  +Ê·gredior+, go from.
  +In·gredior+, enter.
  +Prô·gredior+, advance.
  +Trâns·gredior+, cross.

    HAB-, have.
  +Habeô+, have.
  +Dê·beô+ [for _de·hibeô_], owe to.
  +Prae·beô+ [for _prae·hibeô_], furnish.
  +Pro·hibeô+, restrain.

    HAM-, man.
  +Homô+, man.
  +Nê·mô+ [for _ne·homô_], nobody.

    HÎM-, cold.
  +Hiemô+, pass the winter.
  +Hîbernus+ [for _hiemernus_], of winter.
  +Hîbernâcula+, winter quarters.

    1. I-, AI-, go.
  +Ad·eô+, approach.
  +Ad·itus+, approach.
  +Circu·itus+ [for _circum·itus_], circumference.
  +Ex·eô+, go forth, set out.
  +In·eô+, enter upon.
  +In·itium+, beginning.
  +Ob·itus+, destruction.
  +Red·eô+, return.
  +Sub·eô+, approach closely.
  +Sub·itô+, suddenly.
  +Trâns·eô+, cross.
  +Iter+, route.
  +Aetâs+ [for _aevitâs_], age.

  From +iter+ is the _adv., ending -iter_ or _-ter_, as in
    _aequâl·iter_ for _aequale·iter, al·iter, audâc·ter, celer·iter,
    circi·ter, diligent·(t)er, fort·iter, lên·iter, in·diligent·(t)er_.

    2. I-, AI-, pronominal stem, third person, demonstrative.
  +Is+, this one.
  +Eô+, there.
  +Inter·eâ+, meanwhile.
  +Inter·im+, meanwhile.
  +Post·eâ+, afterwards.
  +Propter·eâ+, for the reason (that).
  +Î·dem+, the same.
  +Iden·t·idem+ [for _idem·et·idem_], again and again.
  +I·pse+, self.
  +Ibî+, there.
  +Inde+, thence.
  +De·inde+, thereupon.
  +Ita+, thus.
  +Ita·que+, therefore.
  +Item+, likewise.
  +?I·dôneus+, suitable.

  +Ûnus+ [for _oenus_], one.
  +Ûnâ+, together.
  +Ûni·versus+, all.
  +Ûn·decimus+, eleventh.
  +Ûllus+ [for _ûnulus_], any.
  +Nûllus+ [for _ne·ûnulus_], none.
  +Nôn·nûllus+, some.
  +Nôn+ [_ne·oenum (ûnum)_], not.
  +Nôn·dum+, not yet.

    IA-, IAC-, go, send.
  +Iaciô+, throw.
  +Ad·iciô+, hurl.
  +Circum·iciô+, place around.
  +Côn·iciô+, hurl.
  +Dê·iciô+, throw down from.
  +Dê·iectus+, slope.
  +Inter·iciô+, place between.
  +Prô·iciô+, hurl.
  +Re·iciô+, hurl back.
  +Iaceô+, lie.

    IC-, AIC-, like.
  +Aequâl·iter+, evenly.
  +Ad·aequô+, equal.
  +In·îquus+, unfavorable.
  +In·îquitâs+, inequality.

    IV-, IVG-, bind, yoke.
  +Iugum+, ridge.
  +Con·iungô+, join together.
  +Cûnctus+ [for _côn·iûnctus_], all.
  +Iûs+, right.
  +Iûstitia+, justice.
  +Con·iûrô+, conspire.
  +In·iûria+, wrong.
  +Iû·dicô+, judge.
  +Iubeô+, order.
  +Iûxtâ+ [for _iûgistâ_], close by.

    LAG-, loose.
  +Re·languêscô+, lose energy.
  +Lassitûdô+, exhaustion.
  +Laxô+, widen.

    1. LEG-, LIG-, gather.
  +Dê·ligô+, choose.
  +Dî·ligen·ter+ [for _dis·ligent·ter_], scrupulously.
  +In·dî·ligen·ter+, carelessly.
  +Ê·ligô+, choose.
  +Intel·legô+, understand.
  +Legiô+, legion.
  +Legiônârius+, of a legion.

    2. LEG-, run, spring.
  +Levis+ [for _legvis_], light.
  +Levitâs+, lightness.
  +Longus+, long.
  +Longê+, far.

    3. LEG-, lie, be fixed.
  +Lêx+, law.
  +Lêgâtus+, envoy.
  +Lêgâtiô+, embassy.

    LI-, pour, smear.
  +Littera+, written character.
  +Dê·leô+, destroy.

    LIB-, desire.
  +Lîberî+, children (the free).
  +Lîberâl·iter+, generously.

    LIC-, LIQV-, let, leave.
  +Pol·liceor+ [for _prô·liceor_], promise.
  +Re·linquô+, leave behind.
  +Re·liquus+, remaining.

    1. MA-, MAN-, measure.
  +Manus+, hand.
  +Man·dô+ [for _manus·dô_], commission.
  +Mani·pulus+, handful, maniple.
  +Mân·suêtûdô+, gentleness.
  +Dî·mêtior+, measure out.
  +Môs+, custom.

    2. MA-, MAD-, measure, moderate.
  +Modus+, manner.
  +Modo+, only.
  +Com·modê (conm-)+, easily.
  +Ad·com·modô (acconm-)+, fit.

    MAC-, MAG-, big.
  +Magis+ [for _magius_], more.
  +Mâximê+, most.
  +Mâgnus+, great.
  +Mâgnitûdô+, greatness.
  +Mâior+ [for _magior_], greater.
  +Magistrâtus+, office.
  +Molestê+, in a troublesome manner.

    MAL-, crush, grind.
  +Male·ficium+, outrage.
  +Mulier+, woman.

    1. MAN-, MEN-, man, mind, stay.
  +Moneô+, advise.
  +Dê·mônstrô+, point out.
  +Clê·mentia+, kindness.

    2. MAN-, MI-, small, less.
  +Minor+, smaller.
  +Minus+, less.
  +Minimê+, least.
  +Ad·ministrô+, execute.

    MÎL-, associate.
  +Mîlle+, thousand.
  +Mîles+, soldier.
  +Mîlitâris+, of war.

    MIS-, wretched.
  +Miser+, wretched.
  +Miseri·cordia+, pity.

    MIT-, send, throw.
  +Mittô+, send.
  +Â·mittô+, lose.
  +Com·mittô (conm-)+, join together.
  +Dî·mittô+, despatch.
  +Ê·mittô+, let fly.
  +Inter·mittô+, halt.
  +Intrô·mittô+, send in.
  +O·mittô+ [for _ob·mittô_], neglect.
  +Per·mittô+, grant.
  +Prae·mittô+, send in advance.
  +Re·mittô+, send back.
  +Sub·mittô+, send as aid.

    1. MV-, MOV-, move.
  +Moveô+, move.
  +Com·moveô+, startle.
  +Per·moveô+, rouse.
  +Prô·moveô+, move forward.
  +Môbilitâs+, nimbleness.
  +Com·mûtâtiô+, change.

    2. MV-, shut, fasten.
  +Com·mûnis (conm-)+, common.
  +Moenia+, walls.
  +Mûniô+, fortify.
  +Circum·mûniô+, blockade.
  +Mûnîmentum+, fortification.
  +Mûnîtiô+, fortification.
  +Mûrus+ [old _moerus_], wall.

    NA-, no.
  +Nê+, that not, lest.
  +Ne·que+, and not.
  +Nê·ve+ or +Neu+, and that not.
  +Ni·hil+, nothing.
  +Ni·si+ [for _nê·si_], if not.
  +Nôn+ [for _ne·oenum (ûnum)_], not.
  +Nôn·dum+, not yet.
  +Quîn+ [for _quî·nê_], but that.

    1. NEC-, NOC-, kill, hurt.
  +Inter·neciô+, annihilation.
  +Nox+, night.
  +Noctû+, by night.

    2. NEC-, bind.
  +Necessitâs+, necessity.
  +Necessârius+, necessary.

    NV-, now (pronominal stem).
  +Noster+, our.
  +Nunc+ [for _num·ce_], now.
  +Novus+, new, fresh.
  +Nûntius+ [for _noventius_, from obs. _noveô_, from _novus_],
      messenger.
  +Nûntiô+, report.
  +Re·nûntiô+, report.

    OL-, OR-, grow, rise.
  +Orior+, arise.
  +Ad·orior+, assault.
  +Ôrdô+, order.

    PA-, feed.
  +Pater+, father.
  +Patrius+, ancestral.
  +Pâbulum+, fodder.

    PAC-, PAG-, PVG-, fix, peg.
  +Pâx+, peace.
  +Pâcô+, subdue.

  +Pûgnô+, fight.
  +Ex·pûgnô+, storm.
  +Op·pûgnô (obp-)+, assault.
  +Op·pûgnâtiô (obp-)+, assault.
  +Prô·pûgnô+, defend.

    PAL-, PEL-, PVL-, drive, scatter.
  +Pellô+, drive.
  +Ad·pellô (app-)+, accost.
  +Com·pellô (conp-)+, drive together.
  +Ex·pellô+, drive out.
  +Im·pellô (inp-)+, incite.
  +Re·pellô+, drive back.

    1. PAR-, POR-, PER-, through, far, reach, try.
  +Pâr+, equal.
  +Per+, through.
  +Ex·perior+, test.
  +Perîclitor+, test.
  +Perîculum+, danger.
  +Porta+, gate.
  +Portô+, bear.
  +Op·portûnus (obp-)+, suitable.
  +Paulis·per+, for a short time.

    2. PAR-, POR-, part, breed.
  +Parâtus+, ready.
  +Com·parô (conp-)+, get ready.
  +Pro·perô+, hasten.
  +Im·perâtor (inp-)+, commander.
  +Im·perô (inp-)+, command.
  +Im·perium (inp-)+, command.
  +A·pertus+ [for _ab·partus_], open.
  +Re·periô+, find.
  +Pars+, portion.
  +Partim+, partly.
  +O·portet+ [for _ob·portet_], is necessary.

    PARC-, PLEC-, bind, weave, fold.
  +Du·plex+, two-fold.
  +Sup·plex (subp-)+, suppliant.
  +Sup·plicâtiô (subp-)+, thanksgiving.

  +Prope+, near [with metathesis of _r_ and change of _c_ to _p_.
      Cf. roots SAC and SCAL].
  +Proximus+ [_superl._ of _propior_], nearest.
  +Proximê+, last.
  +Propînquus+, near.
  +Propînquitâs+, proximity.
  +Ad·propînquô (app-)+, approach.
  +Propter+, near, on account of.
  +Propter·eâ+, for the reason (that).

    1. PAT-, go.
  +Passus+, step.
  +Pôns+, bridge.

    2. PAT-, PAD-, spread, open.
  +Pateô+, extend.
  +Pate·faciô+, open.
  +Pandô+, extend.

    PAV-, little.
  +Paucus+, few.
  +Parvulus+, slight.
  +Paulum+, a little.
  +Paulô+, a little.
  +Paululum+, very slightly.
  +Paulâtim+, gradually.
  +Paulis·per+, for a short time.

    PED-, tread.
  +Pês+, foot.
  +Ped{e}s+, foot-soldier.
  +Pedester+, of infantry.
  +Ex·pedîtus+, unencumbered.
  +Im·pediô (inp-)+, hinder.
  +Im·pedîmenta (inp-)+, baggage.

  +Op·pidum+ [for _ob-pedum_], town.
  +Op·pidânus (obp-)+, townsman.

    PET-, fly.
  +Petô+, seek.
  +Im·petus (inp-)+, charge.

        PIS-, crush.
  +Pîlum+ [for _pislum_], spear.
  +Prîmi·pîlus+, first centurion of the _triarii_.

    PLAT-, spread, flat.
  +Latus+ [for _platus_], side.
  +Plânitiês+ [for _platnitiês_], plain.

    PLE-, PLO-, PLV-, fill.
  +Com·pleô (conp-)+, fill.
  +Plêrus·que+, the most of.
  +Plûs+, more.
  +Plûrimum+, most.
  +Com·plûrês (conp-)+, many.

  +Mani·pulus+, maniple.
  +Am·plius+, more.
  +Ampli·ficô+, enlarge.
  +?Pellis+, skin.
  +Populus+, people.
  +Pûblicus+ [for _populicus_], belonging to the state.

    PLV-, PLOV-, wash, flow.
  +Ex·plôrô+ [for _ex·ploverô_], reconnoitre.
  +Ex·plôrâtor+, scout.

    POS-, behind.
  +Post+, after.
  +Post·eâ+, afterwards.
  +Post·quam+, after.
  +Postrî·diê+ [for _posterô diê_], next day.

    POT-, master.
  +Potius+, rather.
  +Pos·sum+ [for _potis sum_], be able, can.
  +Potêns+, able.
  +Potestâs+, power.
  +Potior+, gain.
  +Im·petrô (inp-)+, obtain.

    PREC-, pray.
  +Dê·precor+, petition against.
  +Poscô+ [for _porcscô_], demand.
  +Postulô+, demand.

    PRO-, PRI-, PRAE-, before.
  +Prô+, before.
  +Prior+, preceding.
  +Prius·quam+, sooner than.
  +Prîs·tinus+ [for _prius·tinus_], former.
  +Prîmus+, first.
  +Prîmum+, in the first place.
  +Prîmô+, in the first place.
  +Prîn·ceps+ [for _prîmi·ceps_], leader.
  +Prîmi·pîlus+, first centurion of the _triarii_.
  +Prae+, before.

    RA-, join, count.
  +Ratiô+, reason.
  +Rês+, thing.

    RAP-, RVP-, snatch, break.
  +Dî·ripiô+ [for _dis·ripiô_], sack.
  +Ê·ruptiô+, sally.
  +Rûpês+, cliff.

    REG-, RIG-, stretch, guide.
  +Por·rigô+ [for _prô·regô_], stretch out.
  +Regiô+, direction.
  +Rêx+, ruler.
  +Rêgnum+, control.

    1. SA-, SI-, sow, strow, sift.
  +Pônô+ [for _port·(prô) sinô_], place.
  +Dê·pônô+, put off.
  +Prô·pônô+, display.

    2. SA-, SIM-, together, like.
  +Singulî+, one at a time.
  +Singulâris+, extraordinary.
  +Simul+, at the same time.
  +Côn·similis+, altogether like.

    3. SA-, pronominal stem.
  +Sî·c+ [for _sî·ce_], so.
  +I·pse+, self.

    1. SAC-, SAG-, fasten.
  +Sagittârius+, archer.
  +Saepês+ [with _p_ for _c_], hedge.

    2. SAC-, SEC-, SCÎD-, CÎD-, split.
  +Saxum+, rock.
  +Sectiô+, booty.
  +Scientia+, knowledge.
  +Inter·scindô+, cut off.
  +Con·cîdô+, cut to pieces.
  +In·cîdô+, cut into.
  +Oc·cîdô+, kill.

    3. SAC-, show.
  +Sîgnum+, signal.
  +Sîgni·fer+, standard-bearer.
  +Sîgni·ficô+, announce.
  +Sîgni·ficâtiô+, signal.
  +În·sîgne+, sign.

    SAL-, SER-, save.
  +Salûs+, safety.
  +Sôlus+, alone.
  +Sôlum+, only.
  +Solli·citô (sôli)+, stir up.
  +Servô+, keep.
  +Côn·servô+, preserve.

    SCAD-, CAD-, cover.
  +Castra+, camp.
  +Castellum+, redoubt.

    SCAL-, SCAR- (with _p_ for _c_, SPOL-), scrape.
  +Calamitâs+, [for _scalamitâs_], disaster.
  +Dê·spoliô+, deprive.
  +?Populor+, +Dê·populor+, ravage.

    SCAND-, climb.
  +A·scendô (adsc-)+, mount.
  +A·scênsus (adsc-)+, ascent.

    SCARP-, SCALP-, cut, scratch.
  +Scrîbô+, write.
  +Côn·scrîbô+, enroll.
  +Prae·scrîbô+, dictate.

    SCV-, CV-, cover, hide.
  +Scûtum+, shield.
  +Custôdia+, guard.

    SEC-, follow.
  +Sequor+, follow.
  +Côn·sequor+, attain.
  +În·sequor+, follow up.
  +Prô·sequor+, pursue.
  +Sub·sequor+, follow closely.
  +Secundus+, favorable.
  +Secundum+, according to.
  +Con-+ [for _scom-_], with.
  +Cum+, with.
  +Côpia+ [for _com·opia_], supply.
  +Con·trâ+, against.
  +Con·trârius+, opposite.

    SED-, SID-, sit.
  +Pos·sideô+ [for _prô·sideo_], own.
  +În·sidiae+, stratagem.
  +Ob·s{e}s+, hostage.
  +Prae·sidium+, garrison.
  +Sub·sidium+, assistance.
  +Super·sedeô+, omit.
  +Côn·sîdô+, settle.

    SEN-, old.
  +Senâtor+, elder, senator.
  +Senâtus+, senate.

    SENT-, feel.
  +Sententia+, opinion.
  +Côn·sentiô+, agree.
  +Côn·sênsus+, agreement.

    1. SER-, SVAR-, string, bind.
  +Dê·serô+, abandon.
  +Prae·sertim+, especially.
  +Servitûs+, slavery.

    2. SER-, SVAL-, bright.
  +Sôl+, sun.
  +Silva+, forest.
  +Silvestris+, wooded.

    1. SMAR-, MAR-, think.
  +Mora+, delay.
  +Moror+, delay.

  +Memoria+, remembrance.
  +Com·memorô (conm-)+, mention.

    2. SMAR-, MER-, ascribe.
  +Meritum+, merit.
  +Mercâtor+, trader.

    SOVO-, SVO-, own.
  +Suî+, of himself, _etc._
  +Suus+, his, _etc._
  +Côn·suêscô+, be accustomed.
  +Côn·suêtûdô+, custom.
  +Mân·suêtûdô+, gentleness.

  +Sed+, but.
  +?Sî+, if.
  +?Si·ne+, without.
  +?Ni·si+, if not.

    SPA-, PA-, draw, stretch.
  +Spatium+, space.
  +Spês+, hope.
  +Dê·spêrô+, give up hope.

  +?Studeô+, strive after.
  +?Studium+, eagerness.

    SPEC-, see, spy.
  +Côn·spiciô+, espy.
  +Per·spiciô+, ascertain.
  +Re·spiciô+, look back.
  +Ex·spectô+, await.
  +Côn·spicor+, espy.
  +Speciês+, form.
  +Speculâtor+, spy.
  +Côn·spectus+, sight.
  +Dê·spectus+, view downward.
  +Prô·spectus+, view forward.

    STA-, stand, set.
  +Côn·stanter+, uniformly.
  +În·stô+, press forward.
  +Prae·stô+, excel, show.
  +Côn·sistô+, take position.
  +Dê·sistô+, stop.
  +În·sistô+, take a stand.
  +Re·sistô+, resist.
  +Statuô+, determine.
  +Côn·stituô+, determine.
  +Statim+, at once.
  +Statiô+, picket.
  +Statûra+, stature.

    STER-, STRA-, STLA-, strow, spread.
  +Lâtus+ [old, _stlâtus_], broad.
  +Lâtitûdô+, width.

    STRV-, spread, heap.
  +Ex·struô+, erect.
  +În·struô+, arrange.

    1. TA-, TEN-, stretch.
  +Prîs·tinus+ [for _prius·tinus_], former.
  +Prô·tinus+, at once.
  +Tener+, tender.
  +Teneô+, hold.
  +Con·tineô+, restrain, keep.
  +Dis·tineô+, separate.
  +Ob·tineô+, hold.
  +Per·tineô+, extend to.
  +Re·tineô+, detain.
  +Sus·tineô+ [for _subs·tineô_], sustain.
  +Sus·tentô+ [for _subs·tentô_], hold out.
  +Tendô+, stretch.
  +Con·tendô+, hasten.
  +?Tempus+, time.

    2. TA-, pronominal stem, third person, demonstrative.
  +Tam+, so.
  +Tantus+, so great.
  +Tantulus+, so trifling.
  +Tamen+, still.
  +Tot·idem+, just as many.
  +Tum+, then.

  Also the final element in _au·tem, au·t, i·ta, i·ta·que, u·t_.

    TAG-, touch, seize.
  +At·tingô (adt-)+, touch.
  +Red·in·tegrô+, renew.

    TARC- (TARP-), TREP-, turn, twist.
  +Tormentum+, engine for hurling.
  +Turpitûdô+, disgrace.
  +Trabs+, beam.

    TEC-, TAX-, weave, arrange.
  +In·texô+, weave in.
  +Têlum+ (for _teclum_), spear.

    TEM-, TAN-, cut.
  +Con·temptus+, contempt.
  +Con·tumêlia+, insult.

    TER-, TREM-, TERS-, shake, scare.
  +Dê·terreô+, prevent.
  +Per·terreô+, thoroughly frighten.
  +Terror+, fright.

    TV-, TVM-, TAV-, TO-, swell.
  +Tumulus+, mound.
  +Tumultus+, uproar.
  +Tôtus+, whole.

    TVR-, harry, crowd.
  +Per·turbô+, throw into confusion.
  +Prô·turbô+, drive off,
  +?Turris+, tower.

        VAG-, VEH-, move, carry.
  +Vêxillum+, flag.
  +Vêxô+, harass.

    1. VEL-, VAL-, VER-, cover, guard.
  +Vâllum+, rampart.
  +Inter·vâllum+, distance.
  +Vereor+, fear.

    2. VEL-, VOL-, tear, pluck.
  +Vulnus+, wound.
  +Vulnerô+, wound.

    VER-, say.
  +Verbum+, word.
  +Vêrô+, in truth.

    VERG-, VRG-, VALG-, slope, press.
  +Vergô+, incline.
  +Urgeô+, press.
  +Vulgô (volgô)+, generally.

    VERT-, turn.
  +Â·vertô+, turn away.
  +Con·vertô+, turn around.
  +Re·vertô+, return.
  +Re·vertor+, return.
  +Versô+, turn about, _pass._ dwell.
  +Ad·versus+, opposite.
  +Dî·versus+, turned away.
  +Intr·ôrsus+ [for _intrô·versus_], within.
  +R·ûrsus+ [for _re·vorsus_], again.
  +Trâns·versus+, at right-angles.
  +Ûni·versus+, all.

    VET-, VIT-, year, old.
  +In·veterâscô+, grow old in.
  +Vetô+, forbid.

    VI-, VIC-, twine.
  +Vînea+, covered shed.
  +Vînum+, wine.
  +Vîmen+, willow, withe.

    VIC-, conquer.
  +Vincô+, conquer.
  +Vîctor+, victorious.
  +Prô·vincia+, province.
  +Vix+, barely.

    VID-, see.
  +Videô+, see.
  +In·videô+, envy.
  +Prô·videô+, procure.
  +Prû·dentia+ [for _prô·videntia_], wisdom.
  +Im·prô·vîsô (inp-)+, unexpectedly.

    VIR-, man.
  +Vir+, man.
  +Virtûs+, valor.

    VOC-, VAG-, call.
  +Con·vocô+, call together.
  +Re·vocô+, call back.
  +Vôx+, voice.

    VOL-, will, wish.
  +Voluntâs+, wish.
  +N·ôlô+ [for _nê·vôlô_], be unwilling.
  +Quam·vîs+, howsoever.

  +At+, but.
  { +At·que+, and.
  { +Âc+,
  +Et+, and.
  +Et·iam+, even.
  +Ad+, to.
  +Ap·ud+, among.

  +Ex+, +Ê+, from, out of.
  +Extrêmus+, furthest.

  +Locus+ [for _stlocus_], place.
  +Con·locô (coll-)+, place.

  +Multus+, much.
  +Multitûdô+, large number.

  +Proelium+, battle.
  +Proelior+, fight.

  +Superior+, higher.
  +Summus+ [for _supimus_], highest
  +Suprâ+, above.
  +Superô+, overcome.

  +Tardus+, slow.
  +Tardô+, retard.

  +Três+, three.
  +Trî·duum+, three days' time.
  +Tribûnus+, military tribune.
  +Tertius+, third.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errata (noted by transcriber)

Missing or incorrect punctuation in the vocabulary lists was silently
corrected when it did not affect meaning. Other errors are listed
below.

WILLIAM C. COLLAR, A.M.  [_. after C invisible_]

Chap. 25: et manipulos laxâre iûssit,  [iûssit.]

Notes:
  Chap. 6, Page 26:
  24. ... notwithstanding A. & G., p. 389, Rem.  [A. &. G.]
  Chap. 8, Line 7:
  ... Compare chap. 7, l. 8.  [chap 7]
  Chap. 26, Page 36:
  16. ... Compare +ab sinistra parte+, p. 35, l. 13
    [_text has "p. 23", using chapter number in place of page number_]
  Chap. 33, Page 40:
  5. +ne quam ... iniûriam+: see p. 39, l. 28, and note
    [_note is to simplified text, Chap. 33, l. 5_]

Vocabulary:
  +Con·diciô+, -ônis, F., [DÎC-, DIC-] [_hyphen after DIC missing_]
  +Molestê+, adv. [MAC-, MAG-]  [1 MAC-]
  +Proximê+ ..., _nearest; most recently  [most, recently]
  +Trâns·gredior+, 3 ... go over  [go, over]

Etymology:
  PED-, tread ... +Ex·pedîtus+, unencumbered  [unemcumbered].





